Project Gutenberg's The unwritten history of old St. Augustine, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The unwritten history of old St. Augustine

Author: Various

Editor: A. M. Brooks

Translator: Annie Averette

Release Date: May 28, 2017 [EBook #54804]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNWRITTEN HISTORY ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)








[Illustration: Founding of St. Augustine By Pedro Menendez, September 8,
                                1565.]

                    [Illustration: Text decoration]




                                  THE
                               UNWRITTEN
                             HISTORY _of_
                           Old St. Augustine

                   Copied from the Spanish Archives
                      in Seville, Spain, by Miss
                           A. M. Brooks and
                              Translated
                                  by
                          Mrs. Annie Averette

                    [Illustration: Text decoration]




PREFACE


We take pleasure in presenting to our readers information connected with
St. Augustine never before published. It is composed largely of reports
and letters to the King of Spain, much of it written by Pedro Menendez
himself, and contains decrees and letters from the King to the Governor,
Generals and Officers having charge of the Florida Provinces. It has
been buried for over three centuries, in Seville, Spain. It is reliable,
having been written in old Spanish and guarded with care. It contains
facts for which many have sought in vain. The style in which it is
written is clear and comprehensive, without being diffuse or overdrawn.
It is the true history of our country.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I--A. D. 1565                                                  1

Royal Decree from King Philip II in reference to further discovery and
settlement of Florida--Officers and number of men appointed to go in the
Armada--Reports from the Armada after leaving--Report from Pedro
Menendez to his Majesty--The English and French have already settled
here--Necessity of Spaniards taking entire control--Letter from the King
to Pedro Menendez--Tells of English and French vessels reported to have
sailed for these Provinces--King sends Fleet with sailors, soldiers and
supplies that the person of Pedro Menendez may be guarded properly as
Governor and Captain General of the Province of Florida.

CHAPTER II--A. D. 1565                                                13

Pedro Menendez gives an account to his Majesty of the Fort Matanzas
Massacre--Menendez and army escape from being made prisoners by the
French on account of a tornado--Because of the swollen river the Council
agree to make a land attack--Spaniards surprise and take Fort Matanzas
without loss of a single man--Killing over two hundred Frenchmen
and capturing Laudonnier--Find Indians enchanted with the
Lutherans--Shipwrecked Frenchmen found on coast--With hands tied behind
them are stabbed in the back by Spaniards.

CHAPTER III--A. D. 1598                                               27

Report of Fernando Miranda, agent to the King, complains of
Governor--Espionage over vessels--Gives account of work of
negroes--Houses and churches built, land cleared--Soldiers assist in
repairing Fort--Report of Bartolome De Arguellas--Capture of rebellious
Indians--Sending some to Havana to be hanged, some to be
imprisoned--Casiques render obedience to the Governor who assures them
of his good intentions--Pedro Pertrene reports to the King of being
newly appointed to be Captain of a Garrison in Florida--Insufficiency of
salary to meet expenses--Because of long service to his Majesty implores
aid and satisfaction--Dona Maria Menendez, Casique, writes the King
asking aid in meeting the expenses of instructing the Indians in
Christianity and good government.

CHAPTER IV--A. D. 1598                                                34

Extract from official report made by Gonzales Menendez Canso, Governor
and Captain-General--Six priests of the San Franciscan order murdered by
Indians--Lieutenant Eciga sent to see if any of the priests are still
living--Hears of one--Is refused permission to see him--After much
persuasion and many threats Friar Fray Francisco is delivered--Manner of
the death of the others is investigated--Fray Francisco makes a
statement in regard to the death of the other priests, is forbidden by
the Canons of the Church to reveal all--Notary Public Juan Ximenes
swears to the investigation of several Indians through an
interpreter--Execution of Indian Lucas as participating in the murder of
Fray Blas.

CHAPTER V--A. D. 1600                                                 49

Letter from one of eleven monks sent out by his Majesty to spread the
gospel--Report eighty churches in different Missions--Indians lazy and
improvident--Avarice of Governor causes dissatisfaction--People desire
his immediate removal--Fray Lopez, a Missionary, has converted many
Indians in twelve years of service, among them Don Juan, a Casique, who
stands highly among his people--His influence quells many
uprisings--Juan Nunez Rios complains of Governor in a letter to the
King--Begs for an open Port that the people may go back and forth and
trade--An officer asks to be allowed to serve his Majesty
elsewhere--Fray Blas De Montes implores that he may be allowed to come
to Spain for retirement--Gives account of a fire which burned the church
among other houses--Slow progress among the Indians--Advices that a
Bishop be sent--Report of Gonzales Menendez Canso to his Majesty--A
shipmaster bearing dispatches shipwrecked in storm--Governor aids him
from the Royal Treasury--Auditor from his Majesty arrives--Reports the
Garrison abounding in fruits and grain--Grieves over the death of the
Christian Indian Don Juan--Return of Fray Lopez from New Spain in good
health--Reports the money brought to establish a hospital--More money
needed for Garrison expenses--Francisco Redondo Villegas, Officer of
Customs, is not treated with the respect due his Royal Office by the
Governor--Reports affairs in a muddled condition--Soldiers well
drilled--Much land under cultivation--Wages small--Rations insufficient.

CHAPTER VI--A. D. 1605-1608                                           67

Minutes of a Bull or Bill of Supplication to be presented to the Holy
See asking for concession of graces and powers for Catholic residents in
Florida--Minorcan families brought priest and monk with them--Wish new
privileges and graces granted--In regard to a Cedula from his Majesty,
which instructs as to duties on wine--Priests and Monks of Tasco use
Municipal monies for their own interests--Advises a change in the office
of Treasurer of the Royal Chest--Vessels carry important papers for his
Majesty lost--Favors shown to Don Francisco gratifies the people--Letter
from Pedro Ibarra to his Majesty says there is not sufficient support
for the Garrison--Solicits aid for a poor widow--Soldiers find amber in
a fish, for which Menendez exacts a duty--French and English pirates
cause much anxiety--A few captured, some imprisoned and ten
hanged--Visiting Indian chiefs so impressed with the religious services
and processions that they ask for friars to instruct their people--Asks
for assistance in building a fort at the mouth of Miguel Moro--Endeavors
to find the source of river San Mateo and Lake Miami--A garrison of
warlike people--Proposition to establish a Manager of the Inquisition to
subjugate and control them--Does not wish to let certain priest and
captain--Report of Juan Menendez Marquez--Deplores the decision to
reduce the garrison--Advises a return to the policy of Pedro Menendez,
his cousin--Desires permission to come to Spain to more fully lay the
condition before his Majesty.

CHAPTER VII--A. D. 1622-1640                                          82

Report of Antonio Benavides to his Majesty--The Spanish King instructs
the establishment of friendly relations with the English of the
Carolinas--Don Francisco Menendez with other officers sent out--Mission
fails owing to the English not having yet received instructions from
London--Requested the removal of an English fort built on Spanish
territory--Refusal--The matter fully laid before his Majesty--Report of
Luis De Rojas--A Frigate sent out to assist a fleet in bringing
supplies, run down by an enemy, boat stripped and burned, soldiers and
crew escape to shore and finally reach the garrison--They collect
Indians and soldiers and return--The enemy take to their launches and
escape--Forty-seven persons only saved from a Spanish Fleet which had
been captured by a Dutch Fleet--Recommends that his Majesty build a fort
at the bar of the place called Jega--Report of Luis Ussitinez to his
Majesty--The Mandate of the King carried out for prayer to Almighty God
for the success of the King’s arms taken up against France--At a meeting
of the Board of the City Council of Havana appears a clergyman of the
Holy Office of the Inquisition with an Auto from the Señor Comissionado,
Don Francisco de las Casas, containing instructions as to certain
ceremonies in connection with the Inquisition.

CHAPTER VIII--A. D. 1655-1657                                         96

An anonymous letter to his Majesty--Death of Governor Benito Ruid
Salazer--Two others appointed to serve _pro tem._ die suddenly of a
contagious disease--Certain related officials gather in the night and
elect Don Pedro Ruitinez Governor--A distressing condition follows--The
people’s money squandered--Officials intimidated and abused--Material
sent for repairing Fort used to barter with the Indians for amber and
the money used by the Governor and Treasurer--Consults his own pleasure
as to obedience to church laws and vows--A report from Diego Rebolledo,
1657, as to the necessity of guarding the Ports of the Province owing to
pirates and as a prevention from the enemy entering and entrenching
themselves in some of the distant but rich Provinces--The Friars object
to the fortifications as the Spaniards would retard the conversion of
the Indians--The Governor thinks the real reason is, that because of the
present condition the Friars are the masters of the Indians--A Friar
reports to his Majesty that owing to the Governor insisting upon some
Indian chiefs carrying heavy burdens of corn, when there were vassals
for such labor--The chiefs cause an uprising--They march into the
Garrison and hang the Governor--The Island of Jamaica heavily fortified
by the English who intend taking Cuba, so it is rumored.

CHAPTER IX--A. D.        1662-1670                                   107

Alonzo Aranqui y Cortez reports the auditing of accounts and condition
of the Royal Treasury--Finding of large nuggets in a hill, supposed to
be a silver mine--Goes to investigate--Report of Juan Cebadilla to his
Majesty of having sent out the King’s orders concerning who shall keep
the keys of the Royal chest--Administration of the negroes--Harshness
shown the Royal employees--Francisco Guerra Vega reports a Captain of
the Garrison for indecency and offense to his superiors, for which same
he was reprimanded and imprisoned as a warning--Afterward given his
liberty--The King to the Captain-General of Provinces of
Florida--Instructions as to the continuance of the passage to Marcana
Guale--Founding of the town of Santiago--As to the performance of
certain duties by soldiers, for which money shall be paid--Soldiers
shall be permitted to raise their crops, and not employed in personal
work for the Governor--The Governor shall look after the wants and needs
of his people--By order of the King, 1670.

CHAPTER X--A. D. 1671-1673                                           112

Pedro Menendez received the title of Governor by right of conquest, and
Captain-General and Commander of the Fleet by conference of his Majesty
for faithful, valorous service--Don Martin Menendez receives the title
of perpetual Governor by right of inheritance--Important papers burned
at Simancas--Manuel De Mendoza reports to his Majesty as to the designs
of the English enemy--Discovery of the South Sea--Condition of this
Garrison and other Provinces--Implores aid in completing
fortifications--Report to his Majesty by Francisco De La Guerra y Vega
concerning an Englishman taken prisoner in the Province of Guale--One of
a crew sent out from a settlement of English at St. Elena--This man who
was second in authority was confined in prison on soldiers’ rations--An
effort made to break up the English settlement, which was unsuccessful.

CHAPTER XI--A. D. 1675                                               121

Letters to the King from the Governor Pablo Ita Salazer--Oath of office
administered in the tower of the old Fort which is rapidly going into
ruins--The Garrison needing supplies and ammunition--No warehouses, and
owing to the distance and frequency of storms delaying supplies, the
people are forced to hunt in the woods for roots to appease their
hunger--The Fort in danger from pirates--Ammunition and guards exposed
to the fatalities of the weather--Pleads for more money to complete the
Castle--Its great importance--A pentagonal shape recommended--The
Viceroy of Spain fails to send the ten thousand dollars--One hundred men
needed to guard the Castle--Great danger from pirates--Two hundred
leagues from Havana and five hundred from New Spain.

CHAPTER XII--A. D. 1675                                              130

An effort made to dislodge the English from Santa Elena--Governor
ordered to complete the Castle and defense of the Garrison--Yucatan
families--Master weavers asked for to settle in Florida--Appalache
considered the best Province for settlement--Supplies sent from New
Spain--Barracks to be made in the Fort for the soldiers--Money sent to
finish the new Castle, also supplies for the soldiers--The neighbors to
assist in building the new Castle--Repairs on the bulwarks of
Guale--Increase of troops for St. Augustine--A fortress ordered built at
Appalache.

CHAPTER XIII--A. D. 1680-1685                                        136

Letter from Pablo Ita Salazer to his Majesty--Indians of the Province of
Guale declare themselves friendly to the English, and make war upon the
Spaniards of the Island of St. Catherine--They surprise the six
sentinels, killing all but one who escaped and gave warning--The people
gather in the convent of a Friar and defend themselves from day light
until four o’clock, when aid reaches them from the Garrison of St.
Augustine, whereupon the enemy retires--The natives of the Island
greatly alarmed--Disquieting news of the intentions of the enemy upon
this Garrison--Implores aid from the King quickly, that the English may
be ejected from the land--Don Juan Marquez Cabrera, Governor and
Captain-General of Florida--Gives account to his Majesty of hostilities
in the Provinces--Two Fleets, French and English, going and coming from
Havana--Seize Fort Matanzas and, after plundering, burn it to the
ground--Is now being rebuilt--Great depredations committed up and down
the coast by the enemy--Pushing the work on the Castle--Grieved over its
slow progress, owing to lack of workmen--Begs to be allowed to retire
because of age and long service--To Charles II, our principal Casique,
the King--From the people of the territory of Habalache--The King to the
Governor and Captain-General of Florida--Concerning ten negroes from St.
George, who asked for the water of baptism--A Sergeant-Major from St.
George comes to claim them--Because they have become Christians the
Spanish King decides to buy them--After receiving a receipt they are to
be set at liberty, each one given a document to that effect--The King
reprimands Don Diego Quiroga for not attending to these matters--Orders
a full account to be sent as soon as it is accomplished.

CHAPTER XIV--A. D. 1689-1698                                         147

Letter of the Governor and Captain-General of Florida, Don Diego Quiroga
y Losada, to his Majesty--Giving an account of a custom obtaining in the
Garrison which endangers the safety of the people--When the Host is
taken out in the night to administer communion to the dying the bells
are rung until its return which is often hours, thus preventing the
hearing the firing of the sentries across the river who are instructed
to fire as often as there are numbers of vessels sighted--This danger
fully laid before the Priest, who refused to discontinue the ringing of
the bells, notwithstanding the city has been in arms awaiting the enemy
for some days--In a Cedula by his Majesty of July 18th, 1674, he asks
for a statement concerning the order and place of the Holy Tribunal of
the Inquisition--These questions answered by Severino Mausaneda March
17th, 1690--An account of a military review in St. Augustine by Governor
Don Diego Quiroga y Losada--Also recounts the great advantage to the
City by building a sea wall to extend from the Fort the entire length of
the City thus securing it against the sea which at present comes up to
the houses during a storm--The soldiers and citizens subscribe ten
thousand dollars, and the King is petitioned for aid that the citizens
seeing his Majesty’s interest will be encouraged to proceed--The King
rebukes Governor Don Diego Quiroga y Losada of the city of St.
Augustine for unjustly taxing the Indians--Misappropriating funds sent
by agreement for canvas and provisions for them--Not attending to their
wants and comfort and treating them alone as vassals--Extracts from the
investigations of the Council as to alleged excesses committed by the
Governor Don Francisco Moral Sanchez--His ill treatment of a Captain of
Grenadiers--Acting according to his own will and not to military
law--The Governor’s removal desired--A report according to the King’s
command concerning affairs under Governor Don Francisco Morales
Sanchez--Investigation shows that the facts set forth in the different
papers and petitions sent to his Majesty to have been only too
true--Impossible to put upon paper the strange, divers and extraordinary
excesses committed by this Governor--The abuses sufficient to chill the
soul and congeal the blood.

CHAPTER XV--A. D. 1708-1723                                          163

Francisco Córcoles y Martinez in a letter to his Majesty reports all
possible measures taken to prevent the destroying of this
Province--Indians from the villages bordering on the Carolinas, aided by
the English, each day carry off certain families, Christians and
natives, more than ten thousand having been carried off to
date--Probably sold into slavery--A Treaty urged with the English of the
Carolinas, else there will be a continuance of hostilities and the
spread of the Gospel impeded--In a second letter the Governor gives an
account of certain Friars in a dispute with the Priest of the Parish
concerning the rights to marry soldiers, Spaniards, Indians and
half-breeds--The matter laid before the Governor, who in turn refers it
to his Majesty--Recommends the abolishing of all Heathen customs--By a
Royal dispatch, A. D. 1721, the Governor of Florida is commanded to go
in person to the Governor of the Carolinas and arrange with him a Treaty
of Peace between the English and Spanish of those Provinces
adjoining--Which same was carried out as far as possible--Trinkets and
clothing sent to the Casiques and chiefs of Apalachicola as
commanded--Indians restless making preparations for war--English
spreading dissatisfaction--A Council of war decides to send a vessel to
Havana to the Governor asking for men, arms and provisions.

CHAPTER XVI--A. D. 1736-1739                                         174

Governor Señor Montiano in a letter to his Majesty says: It is reported
that Don Diego Oglethorpe has said openly “that should he receive orders
from his Government to fix the boundary lines between the Spanish
possessions and the Carolinas, he would so delay its execution that
there should never be a sign of these limits”--Montiano thinks “it will
be impossible to ever discuss matters of importance with such a man and
it will be best that he be removed”--An Indian, Juan Ygnacio de las
Reyes, gives himself up to the English, under pretext of having killed
an Indian, to gain information concerning the strength and intentions of
the English toward the Spanish--After misleading the English as to the
strength and numbers in the Spanish fortifications, he makes his escape
and returns to this Province--Statement of what has been ordered for the
aid of Florida Provinces--The dislodging of the enemy from certain
settlements on its territory up to 1674--Dispatch of 1675 commands that
if the negro slaves sent to Havana have not already been sold, they
shall be sent to Florida to be put to work upon the construction of the
Castle to relieve the Indians.

CHAPTER XVII--A. D. 1741-1743                                        185

A letter from the Governor Francisco Córcoles y Martinez--Conduct of the
Christians worse than the Heathen--Soldiers guarded while cutting timber
to repair the Fort--The Castle in a tumble-down condition--The Garrison
to be maintained for the propagation of the Holy Gospel and to shelter
the workers of the Apostolic faith--A paper of representation to his
Majesty concerning certain properties willed to the Royal Treasury by
Don Francisco Menendez, and designated by the King for use as
hospitals--The Royal Officers of the Province think these properties
should be sold at auction, and the proceeds applied to the back pay of
soldiers who are suffering and in need.

CHAPTER XVIII--A. D. 1770-1771                                       191

A letter of resolution to his Majesty concerning a letter of appeal made
to the Governor and Bishop of Havana asking for patent and Holy oil to
administer baptism and extreme unction to the Catholic families taken
from the Island of Minorca by the English--These families bringing with
them Don Pedro Campos, Doctor of Sacred Theology, as a Parish Priest,
and Don Bartolome Casanovas of the St. Augustine order as Vicar--These
same claiming to have received their appointment from the Supreme
Pontificate, not knowing to which Bishop the jurisdiction of Florida
belonged--In order that a thorough investigation may be made the whole
matter was referred to his Majesty--Letter of the Archbishop of Valencia
concerning this matter--Letter of the Bishop of Cuba to his Majesty,
expressing gratification over the zeal of his Majesty in this
matter--Advices that the privileges be conferred--Letter of the Bishop
of Minorca giving information concerning same.

CHAPTER XIX--A. D. 1771                                              204

The opinion of the Judge--Having examined the different letters from the
Bishop and made a thorough investigation into the matter concerning the
granting of certain privileges to these Priests of the Minorcan families
of the English colony of Florida, decides that these privileges should
be granted as per reasons set forth in his written opinion, Madrid,
1771--Bishop of Cuba for the Council to Dr. Don Pedro Campos and the
Rev. Father Bartolome Casanovas, extending to these same Priests the
title of Parish Priest and Vicar--Also sending a box containing three
flasks of sacred oil--Hopes soon to be able to send a more extended
prorogation of other powers--King solicited these powers from the Court
of Rome--Asks for a detailed report of the number of families and
condition of the congregation.

CHAPTER XX--A. D. 1773                                               214

Proceedings of the Council at the Court of Rome concerning the appeal
made by the Parish Priest and Vicar of the Catholic families established
in the English colony of Florida--The different Bishops’ letters--Also
those of the Priest and Vicar asking for patent and further privileges
and containing a report of the condition of the said Minorcan families
who are dissatisfied with the lack of spiritual comforts--A brick
church, and are very devout--Of their desire to throw off the yoke of
Great Britain and their love for Spain--Reply of the Judge--Testimony
sent by the Bishop of Cuba.

CHAPTER XXI--A. D. 1773-1786                                         226

Letter from the King to the Bishop of Cuba concerning the petition
soliciting an extension of time and of the privileges for the Priest and
Vicar of the Minorcan families in Florida, and enclosing an open mandate
of His Holiness, enlarging and extending the time for twenty years--A
copy of a letter and statement sent in by Lieutenant Don Nicolas Grenier
in regard to the importance of the Provinces of the St. Marys and St.
Johns rivers--The need of vessels to impress and control the
inhabitants--Provinces rich in timber, turpentine, tar and
pitch--Considers it detrimental to Spanish interests for Americans to
introduce any commerce in the Provinces--Letter from the same Don
Nicolas Grenier to the Governor urging the necessity of further
protecting Spanish interests along the St. Marys and St. Johns
rivers--Tranquility of the country jeopardized by outlaws--Some have
been arrested and paid the penalty with their lives--Matter referred to
the Governor--1774.




The Unwritten History

_of_ Old St. Augustine




CHAPTER I.

A. D. 1565.

     _Royal Decree of King Philip II in regard to the further discovery
     and settlement of Florida--Officers appointed--Number of men to go
     in the Armada--Captains and men to be paid in advance, to increase
     diligence in service--Reports from the Armada after leaving--Pedro
     Menendez reports that the English and French have already settled
     here--Necessity of the Spaniards taking entire control of the
     country--Letter from the King to Pedro Menendez in regard to
     English and French settlers._


ROYAL DECREE.

THE KING.

     _To our officers who reside in the City of Sevilla in charge of the
     India contracts_:

I have named the captains, as you will see, from the description shown
by General Eraso, that they may enlist the 1400 men who are to go to
Florida in the Armada which we have ordered equipped, instructing them
immediately upon their arrival what they are to do, and notify me of
their safe arrival. You must be immediately notified when the men are
gathered together, and as it is expedient with each captain, you are to
send a responsible person that he may pay each man one month’s salary in
advance from the treasury on the day he enlists. It will cost, we
suppose, upwards of 11,000 ducats, that they may go provided according
to instructions received. You are to give each captain a copy of the
order sent, that he may be sure of his men--who, receiving this aid,
neither he nor they be deceived. I also command that according to these
orders you instruct the paymasters so that they may well understand that
each soldier is to have the money in his own hands so that there be a
good understanding between us. This is paid to them as it will be a long
and arduous campaign, and so that they may work with more zest and the
town be established quickly. See that the captains go at this work with
diligence and haste, and you must immediately see and attend to where
you are to lodge these people and from there embark them. Send with them
a person of trust to guide and lodge them and to see that they are well
provided with food and all necessaries for their money. Keep them well
together without disorder or vexation to the people of the land. Inform
me of how you have provided for them and you will have served me. From

BOSQUE DE SEGOVIA.

August 15th, 1565.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPORT OF DON TRISTAN DE LUNA Y AVELLANO, CONCERNING AFFAIRS IN FLORIDA.

The Armada which went to found the town in Florida at the place called
Santa Elena in the port of Juan Ponce on the eleventh of June, and
sailed with good and mild wind. On the seventh day out we were on the
river Espiritu Santo, twenty leagues south of said river, in 27th
degree, from there we sailed six days to the southeast and south until
we found ourselves in the chain. South from there we sailed north in
search of the coast of Florida, and at the end of the eighth day, which
was the eve of the visitation of Saint Elizabeth, we discovered the
coast of Florida eight leagues to the west where the Armada cast anchor
and took on water and wood. Now we began to have rough weather. From
there the fleet sailed on the eighth of July in search of the Port
Achusa, sending ahead along the coast a frigate, the pilot not knowing
exactly where Port Achusa was. The Armada passed ahead and anchored in
the Bay of Phillipina, which was discovered by Julio de Labazares, from
whence the Governor sent to seek Port Achusa, having heard that it was
the best and safest port on all that coast. Navigating along the same
coast where the Armada had come, they found Port Achusa which is twenty
leagues from Bay Phillipina and thirty, more or less, from the Bay of
Miruelo, so that it is between two bays--latitude 30 1-3 degrees. On the
return of the frigate with the news, we immediately determined to set
sail with the Armada. It seemed best to have the horses go by land, so
we put them off in said Bay of Phillipina, thus some of our captains
made the trip overland with one hundred and forty horses, out of the two
hundred and forty we started with, the others having died at sea. On the
bar of Phillipina we had some trouble with the Armada in crossing, on
account of its shallowness for the larger vessels, also the strong and
swift current--besides the weather had changed, and it was rougher. The
Armada left Bay Phillipina for Achusa on the 10th of August, the day of
St. Lawrence, and it entered Port Achusa on the day of Our Lady of
August, for which reason we gave it the name of St. Mary of Phillipina.
It is the best port discovered in the Indias. The shallowest part at the
entrance is eleven cubits, and after you enter there are seven or eight
fathoms. It is spacious, having a front of three leagues, the Spaniards
are already there. The entrance of the bar is half a league in width, on
the eastern coast is a cliff at the mouth of the bay, and large vessels
can anchor in four or five fathoms within a stone’s throw from land. It
is so safe that the winds and storms cannot hurt one. We found a few
Indian ranches, they seemed to be fishermen. Judging from appearances it
seems to be a fertile and good soil. There are many walnuts and many
fruit trees--good hunting and fishing and good in many ways. We also
found some plantings of corn. On the 25th of said month of August, the
Governor sent Don Tristan de Avellano in a galleon, of those we brought,
for this, from New Spain, with the news of all that had happened so far.
He entered the Port of San Juan de Ulloa on the 9th of September. He
will supply himself quickly with provisions, which at present we have
sent to ask for, and we expect the boats to return soon. They will again
go to this New Spain, and wait there to see the lay of the land, and
where we are to found this town, and understand all the particulars and
qualities to inform you.

When the boats return I will give the details to your Majesty in the
order that the Governor, Friars and other Officers write me, and I shall
be careful to aid them in the name of your Majesty with everything that
they need, so they may not vex the natives, but give themselves up to
friendly intercourse with them, until the time for planting grain. In
future it will not be so expensive, the ground being so fertile we can
gather large harvests, thus serving and exalting your Majesty and the
Catholic faith of Our Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *


To His Catholic Royal Majesty Pedro Menendez says:

That what he sends your Majesty is what he declares to know of the coast
and lands of Florida, and of the corsairs whom it is said have gone to
populate it and seize the vessels coming from the Indias--and the damage
they may do, and the remedy to be used in cases where they should have
settled. Give them no quarter, and appropriate the coast and lands so
that they can be the more easily turned out--that your Majesty can send
to spread the Gospel, prevent the damages that can be done the vessels
coming from the Indias is as follows: That while in Sevilla last May, he
knew and understood positively from persons coming from the Canary
Islands that they had been on the Island of Teneriffe and Port Garachico
with a Portuguese named Mimoso, who is a pilot on the run of the Indias,
and has a wife and home in France, that he has become a pirate, seizing
the vessels of your Majesty. He carried four men of war, and it was said
he was going to settle the coast of Florida; that two other large
vessels were awaiting him, as soon as he took on water and provisions in
that port, and he saw them there in a small vessel without disembarking
for five or six hours, where some of the people who wish to be under
them came to speak to them. He then returned to his vessel and set sail
to return to the Indias. Also, that he heard in Sevilla and in this
court of your Majesty that the English had gone out with a fleet to the
coast of Florida to settle and to await the vessels from the Indias--and
about a month ago he learned that five large English galleons with heavy
artillery had passed about the end of December along the coast of Gaul
and the tempest had driven them into the harbor of Ferrol, where they
were anchored for a day and a half without landing, but the fishermen
had gone on board to speak to them, and he says: If the above be true,
and the English, French or any other nation should feel disposed to go
and settle any part of Florida, it would be very damaging to these
kingdoms, because on said coast of Florida and in said strait of the
Bahamas, they could settle and fortify themselves in such a way, that
they could have galleons and vessels of war to capture the fleets and
other private vessels that came from the Indias, and pass through there,
as they would run great risk of being captured.

Also, that if last summer the French and English went to Florida as we
are certain they did, and should have settled and built a fort in any
port, and summered there, giving notice to their home government as to
how they are situated, and should they be supplied this summer before we
can raid upon them, and turn them out, it would be very difficult to do
so on account of the friendship formed by them with the natives who
would help them in such a way as to cause serious difficulty, and even
should we finally succeed the natives would remain our enemies, and
this would be extremely disadvantageous. Should they be supplied this
summer the merchantmen which we expect from the Indias would also run
great risk of being captured. Also, that it would be very annoying to
have the above mentioned or others settle in Florida. Considering the
proximity of the Islands of Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico and Cuba, where
there are such vast numbers of negroes and mulattoes of bad disposition,
there being in each of these islands more than thirty negroes to each
Christian. And it is a land in which this generation multiplies with
great rapidity. In the power of the French and English, all these slaves
would be freed, and to enjoy their freedom would help them even against
their own masters and lords and there would be an uprising in the land,
and with the help of the negroes it would be easy to capture us. As an
example of this, take Jacques de Soria, France, which in the year
fifty-three, with one boat of a hundred tons and eighty men, by simply
freeing the negroes, took and plundered the Islands of Margarite and
Saint Martha, and burned Carthagena, plundered Santiago de Cuba and
Havana, although at the time there were two hundred Spaniards there.
They took the Fort with all it contained, and twelve pieces of bronze
artillery and carried them all off. I consider these negroes a great
obstacle to having the French or English settle in Florida or to have
them so near, even though they should not be in favor with these two
nations, there is danger of an uprising as there are so many cunning and
sagacious ones who desire this liberty that I feel sure the design of
those who should settle in Florida is to domineer over those islands,
and stop the navigation with the Indias, which they can easily do by
settling in said Florida. Also he says: That on account of these dangers
and many others, it seems to him it would be to the service of God Our
Lord, and your Majesty for the general good of your Kingdoms the Indies
it would be well for your Majesty to try and domineer over these lands
and coasts, which on account of their position, if other nations should
go on settling and making friends with the Indians, it would be
difficult to conquer them, especially if settled by French and English
Lutherans, as they and the Indians having about the same laws, they
would be friendly, and being near could rule and each year send out a
thousand vessels to easily treat and contract with these lands which are
said to be fertile and prolific for sugar plantations, which they so
much need and are supplied from these Kingdoms. There might also be many
cattle good for their tallow and wool and other necessities. What seems
to him that your Majesty should do in the service of God and your
Majesty’s and for the salvation of so many souls, and the aggrandizement
of your kingdoms and your royal estates, is as follows:

As there are neither French nor English nor any other nation to disturb
them, that your Majesty should send five hundred persons, sailors,
laborers, etc., and that among them should be one hundred master
carpenters, blacksmiths, plasterers and builders of mud walls, all with
their implements and appurtenances for every thing, with their arms of
defense, such as arquebuses, cross-bows, etc. That among this number of
five hundred people should be four Friars, four teachers and twelve
Christian children, so that the principal Indians would send their
children to school to learn to read and learn the doctrine of
Christianity. There should be three surgeons who would go about in small
boats, canoes or row boats with supplies for one year--go straight to
Santa Elena and from there find all the paths, rivers and ports most
suited and best, by land and water. See the condition of the land for
planting and settle two or three towns in the best vicinity, build their
fort, to be able to defend themselves against the Indians, that each of
these forts should have artillery and ammunition. All this supply with
the cost of the voyage will amount to eighty thousand ducats or more.
There will be left vessels enough to carry a number of cattle. These
must be sent from Spain, because in the Indias we could not find
suitable vessels nor head workmen of the necessary qualifications and it
could not give the desired results, besides the delay would cause much
damage. It would be difficult to find the proper kind of people, and
even if found the cost would be very much greater, as head workmen gain
very large wages in those parts, as do also laborers and sailors. From
Havana it would be still more impossible to bring them, as there are
none to be obtained, and if they have to settle they must go a long way
’round, as they cannot enter the mouth of the Bahama Channel, it being
as easy and quick to come from Spain as from Havana. It would be more
important that your Majesty do this at your own cost and as briefly and
with as secret a diligence as possible, and if your Majesty is not well
served in this, find some one in whom your Majesty can place more
confidence, confer with them and let them take charge of
affairs--although it would be far better for your Majesty to do this at
your own cost, and with all brevity and secrecy which is the most
important thing. Also, he says: That should there be French in this land
or on the sea awaiting the merchant vessels from the Indias, it would be
necessary to increase this squadron to four more galleons and one
thousand men, principally marines--the cost of which for six months
would be five hundred thousand ducats more or less.

PEDRO MENENDEZ.


THE KING.


     _To Gen. Pedro Menendez de Avilez, Knight of the Order of Santiago,
     and our Governor of the Province of Florida_:

Know--Having understood that from the Kingdoms of France and England
many war vessels have been sent out with a great number of sailors and
soldiers, with intent of going to that Province, and that now again they
are arming and equipping vessels for the same purpose at Havre de Grace
and other Ports of said Kingdoms of France and England. And that you may
do everything to defend yourselves and capture the Forts they have built
and thrust them from the land, that you may hold it in peace. You might
overlook the damage they have done to navigation. We have arranged for
and ordered 1,500 infantrymen to join you and those you have with you
and we send them with the fleet and also all the necessaries--and we
have provided as Captain-General of the fleet Captain Sancho de
Archimiaga, an expert and experienced man of the sea, ordering him to go
to said Province, and in joining you, it gives you protection by sea as
well as by land. Your flag alone must float, as our Captain-General, and
all undertakings must be done under your flag. And for all enterprises
to be undertaken by land we have appointed a Field Marshal and five
Captains to be under him, and that both they and the infantry are to be
directly under you as our Captain-General and Governor, because this is
our will, and we have expressly ordered it. That your person must be
carefully guarded. With your experience both by land and sea we are
perfectly satisfied, still, that you may the better succeed, and that
there may be conformity and good will, as it is important, affairs that
between you and said Captain Archimiaga and Field Marshal and the other
Captains accompanying him as they are men of much experience in war. It
is our will, and so we order you, that in all things occurring on sea as
well as on land concerning the war, you will call these Captains and
consult with them, more especially Captain Archimiaga and the Field
Marshal--that in this way alone must you decide upon questions of
war--because thus it suits us and our service. That I trust in them to
look into matters and provide all that is deemed advisable in such
undertakings--and they will follow and obey you as our Captain-General.
Let it be in such a way that there be good will and intelligence between
you--no dissensions or quarrels, which would be a great drawback, but
that you will proceed with mildness and consideration, as I feel assured
you will, proceeding to free those lands, and give no quarters to the
enemy to take root in them--and if it were possible, and there should be
no notable inconvenience, you divide the fleet. Captain Juan Zurita and
his company of Artillery go with the Infantry, as you will see. Of
their success you will see to it, and give an account.

PHILIP II.

Madrid, September 8th, 1565.




CHAPTER II.

A. D. 1565.

     _Menendez reports that his army escapes from being made prisoners
     by the French on account of a tornado--The Council agree to make a
     land attack, the river being too much swollen for their
     transports--The Spaniards surprise and take Fort Matanzas without
     the loss of a single man, killing over two hundred Frenchmen and
     capturing Laudonnier--The Indians enchanted with the
     Lutherans--Shipwrecked Frenchmen found on the coast--With their
     hands tied behind them they are stabbed in the back by the
     Spaniards._


FORT MATANZAS MASSACRE, 1565.

I wrote to your Majesty from aboard the galleon San Salvador on
September 11th, this being the day she left Port. The duplicate of the
letter goes in this, and later on will send the other. While I was on
the Bar in a sloop with two small boats with artillery and ammunition
there came upon us four French galleons which had run us down with two
or three small vessels to prevent us from landing here. Taking the
artillery and provisions, although the weather was not propitious for
crossing the Bar, I preferred to take the chances rather than surrender
myself and one hundred and fifty persons, who were with me, into their
power. Our Lord miraculously saved us. The tide was low, there being
only one and a half scant fathoms of water on the bar, and their vessel
required one and a half long fathoms. They saw we had escaped them, as
they spoke asking me to surrender, to have no fear. They then turned to
search for the galleon, thinking we could not escape them. Two days out
a heavy storm and tornado overtook them. It seemed to me they could not
return to their Fort, running too great a risk of being lost, and to
return to capture us they would have to bring a larger force and of the
best they had. Thinking that their Fort would remain weak and it was the
right time to capture it I called a council of the captains, who agreed
with me, and decided to attack the fort by land. I therefore took five
hundred men, the three hundred arquebusiers, the rest pikemen, and with
these few, taking our knapsacks and putting in each six pounds of
biscuit and a measure of one and a half gallons of wine, with our arms
and ammunition; each Captain and soldier--I was among the first setting
the example, carrying this food and arms on my back. Not knowing the
way, we hoped to get there in two days, it being distant about eight
leagues or so, as we were told by two Indians who went with us as
guides. Leaving this Fort of St. Augustine in the order above described
and with determination on the eighteenth of September, we found the
rivers so swollen from the copious rains that it was impossible to ford
them and we were obliged to take a circuitous route which had never been
used before through swamp and unknown roads to avoid the rivers.

After walking until nine or ten o’clock at night, on the morning of the
twentieth, which is the feast of San Mateo, we arrived in sight of the
Fort. Having offered prayers to the Blessed Lord and His Holy Mother,
supplicating them to give us victory over these Lutherans, it was agreed
that with twenty ladders, which we carried, to assail the Fort. His
Divine Majesty had mercy upon us and guided us in such a way that
without losing one man and with only one injured (who is now well), we
took the Fort with all it contained, killing about two hundred and
thirty men, the other ten we took as prisoners to the forest. Among them
were many noblemen, one who was Governor and Judge, called Monsieur
Laudonnier, a relative of the French Admiral, and who had been his
steward. This Laudonnier escaped to the woods and was pursued by one of
the soldiers who wounded him, and we know not what has become of him, as
he and the others escaped by swimming out to two small boats of the
three vessels that were opposite the Fort, with about fifty or sixty
persons. I sent them a cannonade and call of the trumpet to surrender
themselves, vessels and arms. They refused, so with the artillery found
in the Fort we sunk one vessel, the others taking up the men went down
the river where they had two other vessels anchored laden with
provisions, being of the seven sent from France, and which had not yet
been unloaded. It did not seem to me right to leave the Fort and pursue
them until I had repaired three boats we found in the Fort. The Indians
notified them of our actions. As they were so few they took the two best
and strongest vessels and sank the other. In three days they had fled.
Being informed of this by the Indians, I did not pursue them. Later from
the Fort they wrote me that about twenty Frenchmen had appeared in the
forest with no clothing but a shirt, and many of them were wounded. It
was believed that Monsieur Laudonnier was among them. I have sent word
that they make every effort to capture them and bring them to justice.
In the Fort were found, among women, creatures and children under
fifteen years of age, about fifty persons. It causes me deep sorrow to
see them among my people on account of their horrid religious sect, and
I fear our Lord would punish me should I use cruelty with them. Eight or
ten of the boys were born here.

These French have many friends among the Indians, who show much feeling
at their loss, especially for two or three teachers of their hateful
doctrine which they taught to the Indian chiefs, who followed them as
the Apostles did our Lord. It is a thing of admiration to see how these
Lutherans enchanted the poor savage people. I shall use every means to
gain the good will of these Indians who were such friends to the French,
and there is no reason why I should break with them, and if I can live
with them at peace it will be well; they are such traitors, thieves and
drunkards, that it is almost impossible to do so. These chiefs and the
Indians, their enemies, all show friendship towards me, which I return
and shall continue, unless their depredations increase that I may have
to do otherwise.

On the 28th of September the Indians notified me that many Frenchmen
were about six leagues from here on the coast, that they had lost their
vessels and escaped by swimming and in boats. Taking fifty soldiers I
was with them next morning at daylight, and, leaving my men in ambush, I
took one with me to the banks of the river, because they were on one
side and I on the other bank. I spoke to them, told them I was Spanish;
they said they were French. They asked me to come over to them either
alone or with my partner, the river being narrow. I replied that we did
not know how to swim, but that they could safely come to us. They agreed
to do so, and sent a man of some intellect, master of a boat, who
carefully related to me how they had left their Fort with four galleons
and eight small vessels, that each carried twenty-four oars with four
hundred picked soldiers and two hundred marines and John Ribaut as
General and Monsieur LeGrange, who was General of the Infantry, and
other good captains, soldiers and gentlemen, with the intention of
finding me on the sea, and if I attempted to land, to land their people
on the small boats and capture me. That if they had wanted to land they
could easily have done so, but they had not dared and wanted to return
to their Fort. That they were overtaken by a hurricane and tempest and
were wrecked about twenty or twenty-five leagues from here. That of the
four hundred only forty had survived; that the others had perished or
were killed by the Indians. That fifty were carried prisoners by the
Indians; that John Ribaut with his captain were anchored five leagues
from there in the swamp without trees, and he had in the vessel with him
two hundred persons, more or less, and they believed them to have
perished with all the artillery and ammunition, which was a great deal
and good. Part of it was with John Ribaut and what they had, was
certainly lost. They were saved, and he asked for himself and companions
safe passage to their Fort, since they were not at war with the
Spaniards. I then told him how we had taken their Fort and hung all
those we found in it, because they had built it without your Majesty’s
permission and because they were scattering the odious Lutheran doctrine
in these Provinces, and that I had war to fire and blood, as Governor
and Captain-General of these Provinces, against all those who came to
sow this hateful doctrine; representing to him that I came by order of
your Majesty to place the Gospel in these parts and to enlighten the
natives in all that the Holy Church of Rome says and does so as to save
their souls. That I would not give them passage; rather would I follow
them by sea and land until I had taken their lives. He begged to be
allowed to go with this embassy and that he would return at night
swimming, if I would grant him his life. I did so to show him that I was
in earnest and because he could enlighten me on many subjects.
Immediately after his return to his companions there came a gentleman, a
lieutenant of Monsieur Laudonnier, a man well versed and cunning to
tempt me. After much talk he offered to give up their arms if I would
grant their lives. I told him he could surrender the arms and give
themselves up to my mercy, that I might do with them that which our Lord
ordered. More than this he could not get from me, and that God did not
expect more of me. Thus he returned and they came to deliver up their
arms. I had their hands tied behind them and had them stabbed to death,
leaving only sixteen, twelve being great big men, mariners whom they had
stolen, the other four master carpenters and caulkers--people for whom
we have much need, and it seemed to me to punish them in this manner
would be serving God, our Lord, and your Majesty. Hereafter they will
leave us free to plant the Gospel, enlighten the natives, and bring them
to obedience and submission of your Majesty. The lands being extensive
it will be well to make them work fifty years--besides, a good beginning
makes a good end, so I have hopes in our Lord that in all He will grant
me prosperity and success, so that I and my descendants may give to your
Majesty those Kingdoms full and return the people Christians. My
particular interest as I have written your Majesty is this: We are
gaining great favor with the Indians and will be feared by them,
although we make them many gifts.

Considering what John Ribaut had done, I find that within ten leagues of
where he was anchored, three of the vessels of his company were lost;
whether they were lost or not, they would have landed the people,
unloaded what supplies they could, employed themselves in getting out
the brass artillery and the upright posts and tackle, if not lost, of
the three vessels, rig themselves as best they could, and if the vessel
he was on was not lost he will make every effort to come by sea. Should
he do so I await him, and with the help of God, he will be lost. He
might also go inland with one of the Casiques, his friend, who lives
thirty leagues from here, and is very powerful. Should this be the case
I will seek him there, because it is not convenient that he and his
companions should remain alive. Should he come by sea to the Fort I have
the entrance to the Bar mined with two savage canon and guns, so that
should they succeed in making an entrance, we can sink them. A
brigantine is kept in readiness to capture the people and I shall do
all in my power to prevent his escape. The things found in the Fort were
only four pieces of brass of about five tons, the canon and guns which
had come from France were dismounted and carried to the galleons when
they went in search of me. There were found besides twenty-five bronze
musket and as much as twenty tons of powder and ammunition for these
pieces, about one hundred and sixty barrels of flour, twenty casks of
wine. The balance of the supplies had not been unloaded, as they were
hesitating whether they should fortify this Port, fearing I should land
here, which I could easily have done. Since their arrival they had spent
most of their time in debaucheries over the joy felt at the news they
had received that northeast of Santa Elena was a range of mountains
coming from the Zacatecas where there were great mines of silver. The
Indians from those parts had brought them many pieces of silver to the
amount of five and six thousand ducats. We found to the amount of three
thousand ducats, more or less, in clothes and all kinds of valuables;
some hogs, male and female; also sheep and asses; all this was ransacked
by the soldiers; nothing escaped them. Besides the two vessels found in
the Port we found two near the Bar and two others they had stolen from
the Indians, loaded with hides. Of these they had drowned the crews and
the cargo had been given to an English vessel to carry it and sell it in
England or France, and there remained with them two Englishmen. The
French had no mariners by whom to send these vessels. These two
Englishmen were hung when the Fort was captured by us. The Englishmen by
whom they sent the cargo arrived in port at the Fort we have taken from
them, the early part of August of this year, in a galleon of a thousand
tons called the Queen of England, with three heavy tiers of artillery;
all who saw her wondered and had never seen a vessel so heavily armed
that drew so little water; the other three vessels were smaller. It was
agreed between the English and French that as the French awaited help
from France that Monsieur Ludovic, who was Governor here, should wait
for them until the end of September; failing to return, he, Ludovic, was
to go to France in search of them, and that by the month of April they
would return with a large fleet, to await and capture the fleet of New
Spain, which was forced to pass their Fort; that if aid came, for which
they had written to France, they would advise the English who would come
to this coast by the month of April. It was for this purpose that I
found in the Fort a large vessel and seven small ones, and another five,
one or two of which had been stolen, and the four they wished to send to
France to have them equipped with men and provisions to join the English
and themselves by April; that by that time John Ribaut would have
returned and with the eight hundred men who remained he wished to go by
January to Los Martyres, about twenty-five leagues from Havana, and
there build a fort. They had reconnoitered and found it a very desirable
port. This was agreed between them, and that before leaving France John
Ribaut was to obtain the order that they should fortify Los Martyres, a
strait by which no vessel could enter or depart without being sighted by
them. To keep there always in readiness six vessels, it being the best
sea in the world for them. That from there they would take Havana, free
all the negroes; that they would then send to make the same offer to the
Spanish of Porto Rico and all other colonies. All this information I
gained from the skilful Frenchman to whom I granted life. They had with
them six Portuguese pilots whom they hung when no longer needed; two
others had been killed by the Indians, and two were with Ribaut. The
river San Mateo, running by the Fort we captured, goes seventy leagues
inland and turns to the southeast emptying into the bay of Juan Ponce,
and from there to New Spain and the port of San Juan de Luca, where
there is only upwards of fifty leagues. In the bay of Juan Ponce they
thought next year to build a fort on account of its proximity to New
Spain, distant a hundred and fifty leagues and about the same distance
from Honduras and as many more from Yucatan, and where with their six
vessels they could navigate with ease. On this river are three large
Indian towns. The Indians are great friends of the French who have been
there three times in search of corn. These French landed there in great
need of supplies, having only enough to carry them eight days. Corn they
found scarce and took it almost by force. The Indians themselves are
great thieves--a poor but brave people. All the Indians are not more
friendly to them than to us, and I will not consent to take a grain of
corn from them, but prefer to give them of what I may have. I consider
this country so vast and fertile and the danger from enemies and
corsaires so great and that they can appropriate to themselves the land
lying north of here near New Foundland, of which they are already lords,
and can be sustained by them with ease. Everything should be done to aid
me instead of cutting me off, and your Majesty must be undeceived and
know that I am much better able than your Majesty to enlarge and
aggrandize these your Kingdoms. This Port is 29½ degrees, and the San
Mateo which we captured is 31 degrees. The French and their pilots were
mistaken. I have had it taken by the sun on land. From here to the Cape
of Canaveral there are fifty leagues, three rivers, two ports between
here and Havana, one hundred miles, more or less, which are navigable in
boats among the keys of Canaveral and Los Martyres, and from there to
Havana. I agree to take the good field pieces which we have captured
from the French, and one hundred men go along the borders of the coast,
the boats by sea, anchoring at night near land among the keys of
Canaveral where the sea is as smooth as a river, with the boats they
will be able to discover among the keys the best port and surroundings
to build a fort. So that with the one in Havana and this one we can at
all times guard against the enemy and their entering to fortify
themselves. Nor should we expect fleets or boats of the Indians. With
the people of Havana, Santo Domingo and Pedro de la Roda, whom I shall
have to come to my assistance, I will have until the last of March to
build it, then with these vessels go over to Havana and seek these
people. Having discovered the Port, and on the arrival of Pedro de la
Roda in Havana he will find his vessels which I do not propose to take
out of that Port, also his men, so that he may return to Spain as strong
as when he left there. That I shall place one hundred and fifty
Spaniards in possession to guard against the Indians who are great
warriors and whose good will we must gain. Then, by the 1st of April, I
shall return to these two Forts, and in six or eight days I shall again
take to the sea. By the month of March, leaving these two Forts well
equipped and guarded each with three hundred men, I shall go in vessels
that draw little water which I will soon have here, most of them the
ones taken from the French. I will man as many as I can with five
hundred soldiers and one hundred mariners, found a town at Santa Elena,
which is fifty leagues from here, and has within three leagues of it
three Ports and rivers, the largest of six fathoms of water, the other
four fathoms; admirable Ports and the one we call Santa Elena is the
third, the one the French occupied is very small; the three are
navigable, one within the other, so that he who is lord of one is lord
of the three. It is the best place to build a fort leaving three hundred
men to finish it, pass on up the bay to Santa Maria, which is 36
degrees, one hundred and thirty leagues beyond Santa Elena; then on to
the land of the Indians which is in Mexico, fortify another fort and
leave another two hundred soldiers. This will be the key to all the
fortifications of this country, because from those to the new land it
does not have to be founded. Inland, about eighty leagues, are to be
found a range of mountains, at their base an arm of sea which leads to
the New Land. This arm of the sea enters the New Land which is navigable
seventy leagues where there is another sea turning northeast and we
suspect it leads to the South Sea. The Indians send many cattle from New
Spain which were found on these plains by Francisco Basques Coronado.
They carried the hides to the New Land in canoes to sell to the French
in exchange for barter. From here, in the past two years, they have
carried in their fishing boats more than six thousand hides. The French
can go from here in their vessels to the foot of the mountain range four
hundred leagues from the mines of San Martin and New Galicia and can
mine them to their heart’s content. It would be well to fix our frontier
lines here, gain the water-way of the Bahamas and work the mines of New
Spain. This key and strength is necessary that your Majesty should
become Lord of all of it, because by it you will be master of the world.
I have written to Pedro del Castillo to send me three hundred soldiers
and supplies for eight hundred persons. It would be useless not to have
the three hundred soldiers to serve your Majesty and to provide the
necessaries. Thus on, from the first of February, your Majesty can send
a hundred mariners and the equipments and let them bring everything
necessary to found a town in the Bay of Juan Ponce, as this river is
part of San Mateo, which we captured from the enemy. Eighteen leagues
inland from this bay, and from one bay to the other, we can easily trade
with the multitude of Indians that are there and make them soon learn
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. In this Bay of Juan Ponce is the
Province of Appalache, an indomitable people with whom the Spaniards
have never been able to treat. Thus will all difficulties be overcome so
far as New Galicia which is about three hundred leagues, and so many
more to Vera Cruz, and the same distance to Yucatan. From there this
town will be provided with corn, as there is much of it. As we found the
place and build a good City, there will be no need of founding others
in Florida. We will then proceed to the New Land, easily work the many
mines of silver which are found there, and are the mines of the
Zacatecas. In a few years the silver worked from them will support this
country and be a treasure to your Majesty and a suburb of Spain which
can be reached in forty days from these Kingdoms. With the scarcity of
supplies in the Forts we are suffering much hunger as the grain was
burned and so, unless we receive aid soon, we shall suffer terribly. I
trust your Majesty is satisfied that we serve you faithfully and with
love and in all truth. Without extending myself further, but promising
to keep you advised of all that may happen, may God protect your
Majesty, increasing your royal Catholic personage with greater kingdoms
and possessions as Christianity has need of and your servants desire it
should be.

From these Provinces of Florida from the banks of San Pelayo and Fort of
St. Augustine, October 15th, 1565.

PEDRO MENENDEZ DE AVILES.




CHAPTER III.

A. D. 1583-1596-1598.

     _Report of Fernando Miranda, agent to the King--Complains of
     Governor--Espionage over vessels--Gives account of the work of the
     negroes--Haste makes it necessary to employ soldiers in repairing
     the Fort for which they were paid--Partial failure of crops
     increases the cost of living--Report of Bartolome De Arguellas
     giving account of rebellious Indians--Some of those captured were
     sent to Havana to be executed, others to be imprisoned--Casiques
     render obedience to the Governor who assures them of his good
     intentions--Report of Pedro Pertrene to the King--Is newly called
     to take charge of a company of Infantry in the Garrison of
     Florida--Salary not sufficient to meet expenses of living, recalls
     his long service to the King, and asks for increase of pay--Letter
     from Dona Maria Menendez, Casique, to the King--Asks for assistance
     in meeting the necessary expenses for instruction of the Indians in
     Christianity and good government._


A. D. 1583.

     _Fernando Miranda and Rodrego Junco, assistant Agent, who was of
     these Kingdoms, to His Majesty_:

After the Governor had given a decree of the same suspension, we asked
him that until your Majesty should otherwise provide, we be allowed to
continue in office and watch over your Majesty’s interest. Another thing
which occurs to us to inform your Majesty: Yesterday there sailed from
this Port for Havana a vessel belonging to some one in Havana, and the
Governor made every effort to see if we had sent any papers by her--he
searched the vessel and not wishing to give testimony, we understood he
did not wish any letters sent, and so we dared not write more. We felt
that this would be sufficient for your Majesty to place the remedy and
investigate the cause, and punish the culprit.

In the two years that your Majesty’s negroes have been here, they have
made a platform for the artillery of this Fort of an indestructible
wood--as the one they had previous to this rotted away in two years.
They have made a blacksmith shop, and whatever repairs were needed on
the Fort. Ten of the best of them were sent to Santa Elena to saw boards
to cover that Fort which needed it. On beginning the work it was found
that the whole Fort was in such a damaged condition it was necessary to
tear it all down and rebuild as quickly as possible. On account of the
haste required the soldiers were obliged to help for which work they
were paid. It was completed in four months, during which time the
negroes had to be fed on bread, meat and wine. Besides they have helped
to build a church here, sawed lumber for the building of many dwellings,
and have cleared the woods to some extent for planting. The first crop
not being good, caused extra expense of food and ammunition which was
given them--but for the past six months they have been fed on the
harvest made, with no other expense but the oil and salt. They have corn
enough to last until the next harvest, and all the expense incurred to
the end of June of the present year is six thousand five hundred reals,
from the Treasury of your Majesty--because, although there have been
some other expenses, we have availed ourselves of advantages we had
after having had recourse to what has been offered to your Majesty’s
service. About six months ago eleven of these negroes were hired to
soldiers of this Fort, without the knowledge of the Treasurer, rendering
an account of this to the Governor. It is about a year and a half since
we notified the Governor that he should not keep these accounts, but as
provided by your Majesty they should be sent to this Court. He has never
sent them. Your Majesty will act as best suits him in this affair of our
suspension; we again implore your Majesty to give us a hearing, and some
satisfaction, since we are left in this sterile country without the
means of sustenance. May God preserve your Majesty for many years with
great aggrandizement.

FERNANDO MIRANDA.

St. Augustine, August 20th. 1583.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Your Majesty_:

As the Governor, Don Domingo Martinez Avendano, has been sending your
Majesty an account of the proceedings of our journey, I have not done so
until now, that we have landed in these Provinces of Florida, and seen
the condition of things, the people of the Garrison and the natives. It
was a blessing of God that it was all quiet and peaceful, and the
Governor with much gentleness and discretion entered, and proceeded
well, to support the service of your Majesty. It was a very fortunate
thing, as many of the culprits had made threats, which if carried into
effect, would have resulted disastrously--but they had not the heart to
carry them out, although a number of the worst criminals were out of the
country. Of those who remained, ten were captured, and with their
accusations were sent by Captain Francisco Salazar to Havana, in the
custody of a trusted lieutenant and twelve soldiers, as guards, so that
they may be executed there and accomplish your Majesty’s will. With this
imprisonment and a public reprimand made by the Governor to the other
Indians, all of which remain quiet. Being overcome with fear, I
understand they will return promptly to their employment, and your
Majesty will be well served. The Casiques of this country came to render
obedience to the Governor, who caressed them and instructed them of the
manner and order in which they were to attend to your Majesty’s work--he
told them he wished to visit them in their homes, and the good
intentions and desires he brings of attending to your service and the
proofs he has already given of them. We entertain great hopes that all
will soon be settled. From Havana they dispatched to the Treasurer Juan
Menendez Marquez to be present at the paying off of the employees of
this Garrison. While the Governor intended to have me assume control of
this collection, he seemed to change his mind, and I came here with him,
where I remain attending to the duties under my charge until he thinks
that I may go out and make use of the license your Majesty granted me if
nothing more occurs. May Our Lord guard the person of your Royal
Catholic Majesty, as we have need of you.

BARTOLOME DE ARGUELLAS.

St. Augustine, Florida, July 6th, 1596.

A. D. 1598.

_Your Majesty_:

I do not wish to make a long report in this letter, as I understand a
detailed account of all that occurs in these provinces will be made by
your Majesty’s Governor, Gonzalo Menendez Canso, who in every thing
appertaining to your Majesty’s service and welfare is proceeding with
caution--reforming, arranging everything in the most approved manner,
discovering as he goes, all the secrets of the service, and governing
himself in accordance. He has strong and brave resolutions, as I know,
having communicated them to me, and given me an account of his good
intentions.

Having served your Royal Highness for twenty-six years in this part of
your Royal Fleet, in charge of your Captains-General the Adelantado
Pedro Menendez Aviles, Diego Flores Valdez, Cristobal Eraso, and Alvarez
Flores de Quinones, as Officer in the companies in which I served as
Lieutenant of the Governor of the Castle, under Diego Fernandez de
Quinones, in Havana. Being in that City, retired in my home, I was
called by the above mentioned Governor to give and honor me with one of
your Majesty’s companies of infantry who served in this Garrison of
Florida. In his absence to Guale to the chastising of the Indians, who
so horribly killed six priests of the San Franciscan Order, he left me
in his place. Of the spoils which are usually divided, he has shared
with me moderately, but even with these, and the two hundred ducats I
have as salary, and the advantages given me, I cannot sustain myself,
nor assist at the obligations of such Captains, on account of every
thing in the land being so dear--provisions are the same--and the
servant we had, was taken from us by your Governor. I implore your
Majesty to attend to the above mentioned facts, and as my desire is to
end my life in your Royal Service--and that I may live and keep up my
obligations I may be given some help toward my expenses, and that I may
be allowed a servant, as is customary with all Captains serving in this
Garrison, and trusting that your Majesty will grant me these things as
are granted to all who serve you with good will. God preserve your Royal
Person as I desire and Christianity needs you.

PEDRO PERTRENE.

St. Augustine, Florida, February 20th, 1598.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Your Majesty_:

My poverty and the frequency with which the Indians, both Christians and
infidels, gather at my home to be instructed in matters concerning their
conversion, and other important things concerning the good Government
need with the Governor of these Provinces, places me under the necessity
of asking your Majesty to assist me in the expenses I am obliged to
incur with the Indians, as is certified to by the report accompanying
this letter which implores your Majesty to assist and see to this need,
since from it will result the coming of the Indians with more heartiness
to become Christians and in this way guard the faith. Your Royal
Highness being merciful. That I may do in all the above mentioned what
is just and right, I also implore your Majesty to send me a letter of
friendship that the Indians may see the good feeling which exists
between your Majesty and ourselves. God grant you may have all graces.

Florida, February 20th, 1598.




CHAPTER IV.

A. D. 1598.

     _Extract from an official report made by Gonzalo Menendez Canso,
     Governor and Captain General of the Provinces of Florida,
     concerning the murder of six priests of the San Franciscan Order by
     the Indians--Lieutenant Eciga sent to see if any of the priests are
     still living--Ascertains that there is one, but is refused
     permission to see him--After much persuasion and many threats Friar
     Fray Francisco is delivered--Makes statement as to death of the
     others, but is forbidden by the canons of the Church to reveal
     all--Juan Ximenes, a Notary Public and secretary, swears to the
     investigation of several Indians through an interpreter--Indian
     Lucas is found to have been present and participated in the killing
     of Fray Blas for which he is condemned to be executed._


DONA MARIA MENENDEZ--CASIQUE.

This is a good and faithful copy taken from one of the official reports
made by Gonzalo Menendez Canes, Governor and Captain-General of these
Provinces of Florida to His Majesty, concerning the death of the
Religious of the Order of San Francisco, who perished at the hands of
the Indians who revolted. Its tenor is:

In the city of St. Augustine, Province of Florida, July 1st, 1598,
Gonzalo Menendez Canes, Governor and Captain-General for the King our
Lord, says: That in the month of October past of 1597, he was notified
of an uprising of the Indians of the Peninsula of Guale. They had
refused to obey your Majesty, and killed the Religious of the Order of
San Francisco sent out to convert and teach them, and that he had made
every and the greatest efforts, having gone in person with a number of
infantry, ammunition and water craft to said peninsula, to investigate
and punish the cases, and ascertain the cause the Indians had for
committing such an atrocious crime. Although he made all the ravages he
could, acting upon advices received, he could not punish them more for
the time being, nor could he capture a live Indian, except one, an
interpreter, from whom they could get no information further than that
the Religious had been killed, as will be seen by his declaration.
Seeing the importance of ascertaining the root and cause of the killing
of these Religious, and if any were still living--and why they had lost
obedience to your Majesty, he has made the boldest efforts possible,
going by way of the Luna. Finding the Casiques in conference, we agreed
to send them presents and keepsakes, to induce them to let us know and
understand if any of the Religious or Friars were still living that we
might ransom them, sending to offer them even interest for them, and
also sending a launch with some of the infantry to the Fort Santa Elena,
distant fifty leagues from this Garrison, to enlist the Casique of that
country, on account of the friendship he has shown the Spaniards, and
because he has Indian warriors, and being so near he could do much
damage to the Peninsula of Guale. Lieutenant Exiga, who went in the
launch, found him and treated with him to make war and do all the damage
possible to said peninsula and ascertain if any of them were
living--bestowing upon him many gifts from your Majesty’s treasury that
he might go. It was agreed that Lieutenant Exiga should return to the
Casique in sixty days, and ascertain what military exploits he had had,
and what success. Being a matter of so much importance to your Majesty,
Lieutenant Exiga left this port on the 23rd of May, with two launches,
with infantry and ammunition to accomplish the agreement made with the
Casique. On the 24th, one day after leaving this fort, having gone as
far as the Bar of Asae, twenty leagues from here, he was caught in a
storm and hurricane, forcing him to put into harbor in distress. The
storm did so much damage to the food and ammunition they carried, that
he was obliged to strike with the launch for the shore of San Mateo.
Notwithstanding all the above mentioned, he continued his voyage to the
port Santa Elena, there taking another launch in better condition for
making the journey, leaving his in bad condition grounded on the beach.
Having arrived at Santa Elena and seen and spoken to the Casique who
delivered to him four gentlemen, he said he had taken from four Indians
of the Peninsula of Gaule where he went to make war. That three other
Indians had captured the Casique of Carague, who had accompanied him,
with the intent of making war. In the same way he certifies that they
had alive in the Peninsula of Gaule, near Solofina, one of the six
friars, named Toray Francisco de Avila. Having learned this he came
coasting along the shore and ports of Guale, to see if any Indians
should come out to speak to them. None appeared, until he came to
Tolomato where he saw one, who by much coaxing and presenting of gifts
and reasoning, succeeded in getting him to tell what he knew. Finally
they learned from him that the said Friar was still living. They paid
the Indian to take a letter to him, and they would await the reply--he
did so, and in the meantime they amused themselves coasting along the
shores of Tolomato, until the Indian returned with some of the Casiques,
whom they begged would show them the Friar, that they might certify to
his being alive, and treat with them for his ransom. At first, although
they had heaped the Indians with gifts, they would neither accept of the
gifts nor promise to deliver the Friar, unless in return for certain
boys, sons of some of the Casiques, who had been brought to Governor
Domingo Martinez Avendano, as hostages. As better security Lieutenant
Exiga promised to bring their boys within thirty days as ransom for the
Friar, also a quantity of hatchets and spades they asked for. Lieutenant
Exiga returned to Port Tolomato in fifteen days, and began treaty with
Casiques for the ransom of the Friar, and although he heaped gifts upon
them with a free hand, it made no impression. They are such liars and
traitors, and all their treaties are founded on treachery and cunning.
Seeing that they did not intend to keep their word and deliver the
priest, he found it necessary to change his tactics and show anger,
swearing that unless they did deliver the prisoner they would send for
three hundred soldiers and would run them through with the sword, cut
down all their crops and follow them to Tama. After these threats they
promised to deliver the Priest at once, which they did. After receiving
him, and having him in their power, Lieutenant Exiga made reprisal of
the hostages he carried, and of seven other Indians he had detained on
the launch until he saw what success he was going to have. Four of
these Indians are sons and brothers of Casiques. The Governor holds them
and has brought them to this city where they are at present, and where
he protests he will investigate and take their declarations as to the
manner of death the other friars suffered--where, in what form, and for
what cause? Finding any of them to have taken part in this crime, to
punish them and do justice to the service of your Majesty, and that this
punishment may serve as an example to them, as they have at other times
committed these treacheries, killing captains and officers and other
persons. This I provide and sign from his hand, Gonzalo Menendez Vanso,
by order of His Lordship the Governor and Captain-General.

JUAN XIMENES.

Later the said Governor and Captain-General ordered me, the secretary,
that I should go to the Monastery of San Francisco, of this city, and in
his name ask the custodian priest of said house, Fray Francisco Marron,
to give permission to Fray Francisco de Avila, who had been sent to
teach and convert the Indians, that under the oath which is administered
to the Religious of his Order, he declared how his companions were
killed, what he has seen and heard, and the causes that have moved them
to commit such a crime as the killing of the priests. To deny obedience,
and tell only what he knows and understands of the matter. They
continued the examination, so that all the above may be certified as the
truth. This I provide and sign in his name--and from the declaration of
the father custodian might result many worthy considerations in
questioning the Indians.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

Later--The present notary public went to the Monastery of San Francisco,
of this city, read and showed the decree above disposed of by his
Lordship the Governor and Captain-General Gonzalo Menendez Canso, to
Fray Francisco Marron, custodian of the provinces, who said: that
mindful that Fray Francisco de Avila was one of the friars sent out to
teach and convert in the Peninsula of Guale, and as the Lord, Our God,
had seen proper to deliver him from being killed by the Indians, as his
companions had been, and as a person who knew the habits and manners of
the Indians, and knew their language, he deemed it wise to give him
freedom to say and declare all he considered would be to the service of
God of the killing of his companions--except in cases and things
criminal where his rights of priesthood prohibited, such as death by the
cutting of members--and this I say and sign in his name--Fray Francisco
Marron--in my presence.

St. Augustine, Fla., July 20th, 1598.

JUAN XIMENES.

Gonzalo Menendez Canso, Governor and Captain-General for his Majesty in
these Provinces, ordered to be called Fray Francisco de Avila that in
virtue of the permission granted him by the Custodian Fray Francisco
Marron, to say and declare all he knows concerning the killing
of his companions by the Indians, and of his imprisonment and
captivity--whether his person was badly treated, and all that had
occurred worthy of relating--so as to punish such crime as it deserves
to be.

Fray Francisco de Avila said: Although it was true Fray Marron had
granted him permission to speak, he could not make use of it, in cases
so grave and criminal as the present--it was prohibited him by the
sacred canons of priesthood, to attest in such crimes, because it would
force him to say that which might condemn some, and so, he did not wish
to speak or declare in this case, not to fall into any error. Besides
being mindful that the Governor had brought seven Indians from the
peninsula at the time of his ransom, to this city, he could know and
understand from them all that they might claim. This he said, and I sign
it in his name.

FRAY FRANCISCO DE AVILA.

In my presence--

JUAN XIMENES,

Notary Public.

Later--The Governor and Captain-General Gonzalo Menendez Canso, in order
to investigate, had appeared before him Gaspar de Salas, an interpreter
of the Indians of Guale who, having been sworn in the proper form, gave
promise to tell the truth and nothing but the truth--and that he would
declare all that he was ordered to say to the Indians who claim to give
information; that he will say and declare all that said Indians say in
reply, under the oath that he has taken.

Later the Governor ordered to appear before him one of the seven Indians
who were brought from the peninsula, to whom the following questions
were put: From where do you come and what is your name? He came from
Tupique and that his name was Lucas. Are you a Christian? Yes. The name
of your parents, are they, or have they been Casiques? His father’s
name was Felipe, and he was Casique of Tupique. Where was he from? He
was a native of the town of Tupique. Had there been any priest there?
There had been one named Fray Blas Rodriguez. Tell and declare what had
become of Fray Bias? That about ten or eleven moons past, eight Casiques
held a conference, they were Asao, Tolafo, Atmehe, Fulo, Tupique and
Alnate. When night came they killed the Priest. A helping hand was given
them by a chief called Pisiache, that he might kill him with a hatchet,
with which he gave him a blow on the head, from which wound he died
almost immediately. Afterward they buried him in the church. Say and
declare what cause they had for killing this priest? That Micas and
Casiques said they killed him because he was artful and took away their
enchantment or witchcraft, and would not allow them to have more than
one wife.

Did you hear them say anything else? No. Did he know Fray Miguel de
Annon, and Fray Antonio Lego, among the teachers of Guale, and Fray
Pedro de Corpa, among the teachers of Tolomato, and Fray Francisco de
Avila, among the teachers of Ospo?

I have known them all, and they have been killed. Fray Miguel had his
hands tied behind him, but he did not know if they had killed him--Fray
Antonio was tied, but he does not know how he was killed--he had heard
it said that they killed him with wooden weapons, and that Fray Pedro
Corpa two Casiques had killed in the night while sleeping; that Fray
Francisco de Avila they had not killed, but had him captive near
Tolofino until he should be ransomed by the Governor.

Was Fray Francisco well or ill-treated in the prison?

Sometimes they beat him with sticks and abused him. They sometimes fed
him, but not always, and when they did it was on the leaves and tendrils
of vines.

Had he seen or heard it said why they killed these Priests and
ill-treated Fray Francisco de Avila?

He knew no more than what he had already stated, that the Micos and
Casiques said they were artful and did not wish them to have more than
one wife, and that they reproved them.

Do you know where the ornaments belonging to the Church are, such as the
chalices and other things used by the priests?

They were all divided up in such a way, that nothing is left of them.

Was he present at the death of Fray Blas and the other priests when they
were killed?

He arrived in time to see Fray Blas die--the others he had not seen, but
had heard it said that they had been killed as he stated above.

Had he seen or heard any of his companions who were brought with him,
say they were present at the killing of the priests?

One from Tolomato, named Francisco, he heard him say he had seen Fray
Pedro Corpa after he was killed--the rest he does not know.

All this the said Gaspar Salas said and declared as interpreted under
the oath which he has taken. He does not sign because he does not know
how to write.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

In the presence of

JUAN XIMENES,

Notary Public.

For further investigation of the above, the Governor and Captain-General
had appeared before him the other Indian, said to be named Francisco and
native of Tolomato, and by the said interpreter under oath had him
declare the following:

Are you a Christian, and who are your parents?

I am a Christian, my name is Francisco, my mother is nearly related to
the Casique and my father is dead.

What priest was teacher at Tolomato?

Fray Pedro Corpa, and I knew him there for some time.

What became of Fray Pedro Corpa?

He was killed while sleeping, with wooden weapons, and he was killed by
one of the chief Casiques of the Salcachecos.

Did you see him killed, or were you present at his death?

I was far away, but I heard it said that this Micos of Tolomato and Don
Juan, his heir, had sent to have him killed. I went there, but he was
already dead.

Did the little dress which you wear belong to some religious of that
peninsula?

Yes, but I do not know to which one, I ransomed it from one of the
Casiques.

What was the cause of the killing of the priests?

The cause was, that they reproved Don Juan, heir of Tolomato. By his
cunning he had the other Casiques meet with him, and there was an
uprising in the land, and these killings were done.

Did you know Fray Miguel Annon, and Fray Antonio Lego in the conversion
and teachings of Guale, and Father Berahula, and Fray Francisco de
Avila?

I knew them all--they had been killed by the Indians, except Fray
Francisco de Avila, who was ransomed by the Governor.

Tell and declare what manner of death they have given these religious?

Fray Miguel and Fray Antonio Lego were killed with wooden weapons--he
had so heard it said--the others he did not know.

While in prison was Fray Francisco de Avila well treated?

I have heard it said that he was badly treated by the Indians of
Tolofino--they whipped him--the boys teased him. He ate badly, because
the Indians had little food, and some times he was forced to eat vines
and tendrils.

Do you know where the ornaments of the Church are, and the other
belongings of the priests?

All the ornaments and clothes of the priests were divided among them
all, and the Indians had carried them to their country inland.

Do you know if any of the Indians with you here, were present at the
killing of the priests?

I have heard it said that the Indian Lucas, son of Don Felipe, was
present when they killed Fray Blas--that about the others he does not
know. All of which the said Gaspar Salas Atiqui says and declares
according to his oath given, and because the Indian Francisco said so,
and did not sign because he did not know how.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

In the presence of

JUAN XIMENES,

Notary Public.

Later the Governor had appear before him the Indian Bartolome, of the
Peninsula of Guale, who with other Indians was sent to the peninsula
with a message from him to the Micos and Casiques, to the better
ascertain, if any of the priests were still living. Although he had been
sent, he did not return with the message, until after the treaty for the
ransom of Fray Francisco de Avila. He stated that they would not let him
come--that he wanted to come and stay with the Governor; that he did not
wish to remain among the Indians, and through the interpreter, Atiqui,
he declared the following:

Where are you from, and what is your name, and are you a Christian?

My name is Bartolome; I am a Christian and a native of Tolomato. I was
sent about eight months ago, by this Governor, with a message to the
Micos and Casiques of the peninsula; they would not let me come back,
making threats that they would kill me.

During the time you were in the peninsula tell what you know and heard
said of the killing of the priests; what kind of death they were given?

I heard that Fray Pedro Corpa was killed at night in his cell, with
wooden weapons, and that Fray Miguel, Fray Antonio and Fray Blas were
also killed with wooden weapons. That Fray Francisco de Avila, who had
just been brought as ransom, was the first one taken prisoner. They
stuck him with their arrows, but God did not let him die of the wounds.
They would have killed him as they did the others but for the
intervention of the Casique of Tulapo, who took him from the Indians,
saying at the time that he was his father, and as such he would protect
him.

What was the motive and cause of the killing?

I heard it was because they reproved them; that the priests were crafty,
and did not care for them, and did not wish them to have more than one
wife.

Where are the ornaments and appurtenances of the Church?

They were divided among them, those from the interior carrying many, and
many were also broken, and the children tore and destroyed them.

Did you hear it said whether Lucas, the son of the Casique Don Felipe,
or any of the other Indians brought in with you were present at the
killing of the priests?

I heard that Lucas was there at the killing. I know nothing more.

How was Fray Francisco de Avila treated while a prisoner?

I have heard it said that in Tufina and Chacalaga the boys would chase
him through the streets perfectly naked and whip him with horsewhips,
and that he was starving to death, because the Indians had little to eat
themselves and gave him none. All this Gaspar Salas says and declares to
have been said by the Indian Bartolome under the oath which he has
taken, and it is the truth; he cannot sign, not knowing how to do so.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

In the presence of

JUAN XIMENES,

Notary Public.

       *       *       *       *       *

For further investigation of the above, the Governor and Captain-General
had appear before him another of the seven Indians who through the same
interpreter said and declared the following: (This declaration is not
given.)

In view of said declarations of these proceedings, the crime falls upon
Lucas the Indian, son of the Casique de Tuqui, for having been present
and participated in the killing of Fray Blas, who was sent to convert
the people of Tupiqui. I must condemn him by this my decree, sentenced
according to his declaration, with the penalty of death. The justice
which I order shall be done him is: That when he leaves the jail where
he now is, it shall be with a rope around his neck, his hands tied
behind him, and with a loud voice it must be proclaimed to the public
his crime; that he be taken to the gallows, already prepared for this
purpose, and that there he shall be hung by the neck and strangled until
dead. Because, thus is it well to punish with real justice those who
dare to commit such crimes, and as an example to the other Indian
natives of these provinces that they may not commit similar crimes. So
do I pronounce sentence and command. And if the said Lucas is not
mindful of receiving baptism and should not die repenting, and in the
Catholic faith, I order that he be hung and after his death his body be
burned to powder.

Regarding the other six Indians detained for this cause, proceedings
will not continue for the present against them--they being boys under
age. We shall so send and notify the Indian Lucas.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Alonzo Diaz de Badajoz, Sergeant-Major of this Fort and Garrison of
     St. Augustine:


I order you by this sentence, which will be shown you by Juan Ximenes,
Notary Public, against the Indian Lucas, prisoner in this city, that he
shall be executed as is stated in this sentence, because it so pleaseth
his Majesty. This execution is done in justice to his Majesty, and must
be so accomplished.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

St. Augustine, July 29th, 1598.

Notary Public.

Before me

JUAN XIMENES.





CHAPTER V.

A. D. 1600.

     _Letter from Father Francisco Parga to the King, as one of eleven
     monks sent out by his Majesty to spread the Gospel--Eighty churches
     in different Missions--Complaint of lazy Indians--Avarice of the
     Governor causes dissatisfaction and suffering among the garrison
     and impedes the work--Unnecessary war with Indians--People desire
     the Governors removal--Fray Baltazar Lopez has labored for twelve
     years converting many Indians, among them the Casique, Don Juan,
     who stands highly among his people and has quelled many
     uprisings--Letter from Juan Nunez Rios--Complains of Governor--Who
     allows one Juan Garcia to represent him--People forced to buy of
     this Garcia who takes all advantages--Begs for an open port that
     the people may be allowed to go back and forth and trade--Antonio
     Menendez Canso writes to his Majesty complaining of injustice by
     the Governor, and asks to be allowed to serve his Majesty
     elsewhere--Letter to his Majesty from Fray Blas De Montes imploring
     that he may be allowed to come to Spain for retirement--Gives
     account of a fire which burned the church among other
     houses--Reports slow progress with the Indians and advises that a
     Bishop be sent to administer sacrament of confirmation--Report of
     Gonzalo Menendez Canso to his Majesty--A shipmaster bearing
     dispatches from New Spain shipwrecked in a dreadful storm--He and
     his crew escape in a boat--Governor aids them from the Royal
     treasury--Arrival of the Auditor for his Majesty--Garrison
     abounding in fruits and grain--Death of a Christian Indian, Don
     Juan--Fray Lopez returns from New Spain in good health--Money
     brought to establish a hospital--More money needed for Garrison
     expenses--Report of Francisco Redondo Villegas, Officer of Customs
     and Auditor for his Majesty--Complains of not being treated with
     the respect due to Royal officers--Finds affairs in a muddled
     condition--Soldiers well drilled--Much land under cultivation which
     will be needed as wages are small and rations insufficient._


PATRON LETTER FROM FRAY FRANCISCO PARGA, OF THE SAN FRANCISCAN ORDER, TO
THE KING.

_Your Majesty_:

This is a duplicate of a letter sent your Majesty by a vessel which left
this port of St. Augustine in the month of February of this year via
Havana. I wrote giving an account as I was one of the eleven monks sent
by your Majesty to spread the Gospel and teach the natives of this
country. When we arrived we were assigned to different places or posts,
each one trying his utmost and best to do what he could for the
redemption of these souls. It being such an arduous and difficult life,
having to traverse on foot, bad roads, with little or nothing to eat at
times, that little fruit has yet been yielded, although the harvest,
which we hope eventually to reap for the Lord, is worth the trials and
sacrifices made, as we know that He suffered death and passion to
redeem the souls and rejoiceth over the salvation of one; how much more
should we be willing to suffer for the conversion of so many souls as
there are in this country and whom we hope to save with the help of God?
And so I say that while your Majesty has control of these lands as the
Religious have charge of this Garrison in time of need, and they also
help to support the Church under their care and the ornaments and other
things necessary for the worship of the Divine Lord, not having for this
purpose any income from your Royal Finance. There are more than eighty
churches which have been built in the different missions and others
under construction. We are moved to do this to encourage the Indians who
are incapable of good conceptions and obedience. They have always had
their ministry so that they listen with little appreciation to what we
preach and teach, in grave detriment to the poor newly converted
Indians, notwithstanding that our teaching and converting accrues to
their own good, as we aid and provide for them in their time of hunger,
and when crops have failed. The Indians are so lazy and improvident that
if we did not take care of the crops after planting they would have
nothing. They do not even save the seed for another planting. Of the
Governor I wish to say as little as possible, but the misery, impediment
and calamities among Indians and Christians is due to his avarice, and
if the poor Spaniards who are in the Garrison of St. Augustine had not
the hope that your Majesty would be informed in some way and send them
relief from the fearful calamity which this Garrison is suffering, the
affliction among the married men as well as the single would become
unendurable. They dare not, under any circumstances, send you
information, as it would cost them their lives, and so they have prayed
and implored me as Chaplain, who live from day to day upon the charity
of your Royal Treasury, and have to render a strict account or others
would slander us, and our account of the war and other matters must be
true. The war with the Indians where many have been killed and many
brought in as prisoners was uncalled for and the Indians at “Cabeza de
Martyres” are much incensed. As it is a place where many vessels are
wrecked, the Spaniards have taken whole crews and kept them until
ransomed. We fear the Indians of that place will do much damage to
vessels passing to and fro. We feel very sorry that the present Governor
has shown so much anger and resentment towards the Indians and has sent
your Majesty such meagre accounts of the true condition of this
Garrison. It is swampy, little inhabited by Indians, and the roads
difficult to traverse. The Bar is a rough one; there are said to be
better ones on this coast towards the north. I have not seen them, but
have heard through Fray Baltazar Lopez, Vicar of that Island, who has
been there for twelve years working in the conversion of souls, with
other Friars who came with him, and who have left for New Spain. He
alone remains at his post, much encouraged, as he has mastered the
Indian language; it is of great help to him in preaching. He has
converted many who frequent the sacraments of confession and communion.
Had it not been for him and through his persuasions, having converted
and taught the Casique Don Juan, there would have been a terrible
uprising among the Indians, and probably not a Spaniard left. Thus, by
the industry and influence of Fray Baltazar over Don Juan, who is highly
in favor of Christianity and all civilized ideas, this trouble was
averted. Don Juan has sent relief to the people of this garrison in
times of famine. I recognize in Fray Baltazar that spiritual zeal for
the service of God and your Majesty that this land may be converted,
increase in civilization and aggrandize your kingdom. As Fray Baltazar’s
experience is of long standing, it has been decided that he write to
your Majesty and give a full account of all the happenings. To this
letter of his, which I shall remit to your Majesty, you can give full
credit, as he speaks scientifically and from long experience.

_Your Majesty_:

As a final remedy and forced by necessity and worry which we poor
citizens of this garrison suffer ever since the arrival of Gonzalo
Menendez Canso, we come to implore you, as King and Christian, not to
permit that your subjects and vassals be so ill treated and afflicted by
those who govern here, since your Majesty in your Cedulas always orders
the contrary. There being no corporation as in other cities of like size
to whom we can appeal for protection, I take the liberty of writing
this. We have not done so before, and gone on suffering all that is
possible for us to suffer, because we understood you had been informed
by other parties, and we hoped and waited daily to be delivered by your
sending some one else who would proceed in a different manner, and thus
we poor citizens would receive better treatment at his hands, and
enable us to proceed in better condition to advance your interests which
have been decreasing and losing ever since the said Governor came. Much
of the land that was gained from the Indians, and who themselves had
become quiet and peaceful, has been lost. I came to this country in the
year 1568, twenty years ago, with others from your Kingdom, to aid and
succor, as was commanded by your Majesty in transferring us to these
Provinces, having assisted and served in them on all occasions which
have presented themselves at Port Elena and St. Augustine. I married a
daughter of one of the settlers who was here and had come enthused by
the promises made by the previous Governors, but who spent his life
eking out a meagre existence for his wife and children by taking
advantage of the license which at that time was granted the citizens of
going abroad to seek work which was so much needed. This Governor has
withdrawn this license and forces us to remain in the town proper. The
town is frequently left to the government of his cousin who calls
himself Juan Garcia and whom he brought with him to this Province with a
large stock of merchandise which he sells at exorbitant prices and he,
the Governor, collects all payments. Before this Governor came we were
paid off, but since his assumption of affairs he forces us to buy all we
need of this cousin, and the Governor informs us that if we do not obey
his order in this we must go without. On pay day he keeps all our pay
saying we have already spent it. If one of the soldiers is sick
requiring anything and sends to ask for money to get the needed
medicine the Governor refuses to give it, forcing him to buy it of Juan
Garcia. All law suits or troubles of any kind which arise are brought
before the Governor by this same Juan Garcia, who seems to be supreme.
It is understood that the vast estate is a joint one of Juan Garcia and
Governor Menendez Canso. My house was burned, as can be testified by any
of the inhabitants, fearing to notify Juan Garcia of the fact. I sent to
him and asked him with all due respect to come, accompanied by the
Mayor, who is the only representative of the law, and see the condition
I was in. For this act he has levied upon me for fifty maravedies and
six months’ imprisonment in the Fort. That I must appear before him, and
he has worried me in many other ways. He has taken from us the only
means of making a living for our wives and children and refuses to grant
us any rights whatsoever, except those which in your Cedula are so plain
he is obliged to grant them. And yet he grants all rights to Mexico. It
is a great injustice not to allow us the same privileges. We trust that
being so far from us and it takes so long to inform you, that you will
have mercy upon us and immediately send some one to replace this
Governor. One who will treat us with more kindness and justice. We
implore you to grant the privileges of an open port, that we may be
allowed to go back and forth and trade, so as to enable us to make a
living. Others would write to you imploring the same grace, only all
fear to do so, as we run great risk of having the Governor intercept our
letters. I send this at the risk of my life. There are many more things
upon which I could enlighten you, but fear prevents us from doing so,
and we trust your Majesty will send us relief as speedily as possible.

God preserve the Royal Person of your Catholic Majesty for many years,
as christianity has need of it.

JUAN NUNEZ RIOS.

St. Augustine, Fla., Feb. 19th, 1600.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sire_:

While serving your Majesty in this Garrison of St. Augustine, Florida,
as Captain of one of the companies with the title given me by General
Menendez Canso, it is the same position my father served previously for
a year and a half before the work and place was turned over to me as
your Majesty’s service required. Later Lieutenant Alvarez Hernando Metas
having arrived with certain dispatches regarding my father, who had
preceded me, the Governor, without giving any reason or consulting me in
any way, has taken the company from me and given it to Lieutenant Metas,
who is at present serving. The Governor has only said to me that he
wished to employ me in other services of your Majesty for which reason I
am detained in this Province on half pay. Although I have asked
permission to serve on the Armada and assist in any way I am ordered, as
is my duty, he will not allow me to do so, but detains me here. I
implore you to send me orders if only to be in the infantry of this
Garrison; anything until I am ordered elsewhere, to serve your Majesty.
This is my profession and I have always followed it, and for which I
shall always hope to receive special encomiums from your Majesty, whom
I pray our Lord will bless and protect and preserve from all harm.

ANTONIO MENENDEZ CANSO.

St. Augustine, Fla., 26th ----, 1600.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sire_:

In other letters I have written to your Majesty I have given an account
of the fire we had on the 14th of March of last year, 1599, in this
city. Among other houses burned with the church was ours and we came to
the hospital for shelter, where we still are, and I implore your Majesty
to rebuild our house. The seven hundred ducats required to repair and
cover the house which was burned, and which we hope you will send us,
will be placed in deposit with the treasurer of this Province until a
decision has been reached regarding this country. On account of its
ruined and barren condition it is incapable of maintaining so many
natives as there are, and as was demonstrated the other day, many seem
to think they will order this Garrison removed to another part more
advantageous. Should this be the case, your servants will advise you at
once of all that occurs.

In the report I give you of the Indians I must say, my Lord, that we
make little progress and are but poorly esteemed by them. The fault must
lie in us, as there will no doubt be those who will so report it to your
Majesty. The good esteem which I am ordered to have for the Governor I
shall comply with in every respect except that I shall not lose my
rights; sending out the Friars to convert and teach the doctrine, I
have always observed the order given by your Majesty with the title of
Royal Patron. Since it is a truth perfectly well known that no Friar has
been sent by me or my predecessors to convert and teach without the
permission and sanction of the Governor, and should it become necessary
I will so make him confess this truth, which he well knows, as there are
so few of us he cannot ignore it, as we eat from his hands at all times.
If this country is to be increased and civilized it would be well to
send a Bishop here, as it is quite necessary to administer the sacrament
of confirmation; therefore, for the peace of those who live here, it
would be well for your Majesty to consider and provide as you see fit
and God would wish. There is nothing a man can desire more than the
salvation of his soul, for this it seems to me urgent that I should
retire from this work and take shelter where I can obtain this end,
serving in quietude your Majesty. For this I beg and humbly implore your
Majesty to send me a permit to go to Spain, as I feel assured of the
little success I can obtain by remaining in this country. May our
blessed Lord preserve your Majesty in peace and love, Yours,

FRAY BLAS DE MONTES.
St. Augustine, Fla., Feb. 25th, 1600.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Your Lordship_:

On the 13th there arrived in this city Diego Ramirez, a citizen of
Triana of Sevilla, a second class shipmaster from New Spain, sent by
your Viceroy and Royal Officers from San Juan de Ullva. On entering the
Bahama channel he was overtaken by a dreadful storm, his vessel sprung a
leak and took in so much water they were forced to make for the nearest
land which was on the coast of this Province about one hundred and
eighty leagues from this city to the north, about thirty-four degrees,
more or less, where, on entering a port, the vessel was completely
wrecked and the Master made his escape in one of the boats with the
papers and dispatches for your Majesty and also some private letters.
Coming along the coast, landing at night until he reached the Province
of Guale, where last year the Indians had killed two Friars. There he
found two vessels in the service of this Garrison which had been sent to
carry three or four Casiques, two of them men of great influence in
their tribes, who had come to implore mercy for themselves and others
for the terrible crime they had committed. I now have them quiet and
pacified. These natives carried the master to the ships of this Garrison
where he and his men were given shelter and brought to this City.

The natives also gave them what relief they could. On the arrival here
of the Master he told me of the dispatches he brought for your Majesty
and which he understood were of much importance as they had learned in
New Spain that Chinese, English and Flemish were settling there. He
asked me for passage for himself and men, for any dispatches I might
have for your Majesty and any private mail. He also asked for the means
of sustenance from your Royal Treasury, for himself and men, as they had
lost all. Considering the importance of the dispatches and papers, and
that you might receive them with the utmost speed, I granted their
request and also gave them a change of clothes. He did not wish to go to
Havana on account of the variable winds and so, as I had a frigate in
Port just suitable for the purpose, I fitted it out against the wishes
of its owners, to whom I paid the cost of the trip which three pilots
assured me would amount to one thousand ducats, not counting the
maintenance of the Master and his men. I felt it my duty to aid them
from your Royal Treasury, as they were shipwrecked and there was no one
in this country who could raise a subscription to supply their wants,
all being soldiers or men who have no employment. An account of this may
be kept by the judges and officers in Sevilla against this Province.
Pedro Redondo Villegas, Auditor of the Artillery of Havana, whom your
Majesty nominated to come here to straighten the accounts of this
Province, arrived and has commenced his work. He tells me that he is
notifying your Majesty of all and calling your attention to some. He
says that having notified me of the Royal balance made to Juan
Sebadilla, deceased, being as it is, a large sum, it will be well that
you send a bill, stating what must be done about its collection. Captain
Alonzo de las Alas has not yet satisfied his balance because while
investigating his accounts in virtue of the royal decree of appointments
and of which he was in charge, was suspended for four years. In accounts
taken of different royal officers, they have paid up many losses against
your royal estate. I had noticed this and when the accountant Pedro
Redondo arrived I suspended these payments until he could look into them
and I shall point out to him the result of what I found in them.

On the eighth of February of this year I rendered your Majesty an
account of how I sent the collections to your Treasurer, Juan Menendez
Marquez. This time the causes made known in the letter which arrived at
this Port on the 21st of this month with four vessels and their cargo of
provisions, ammunition and money collected from the allowance was too
late, so that hereafter your Royal order set forth in Cedule will be
obeyed.

This Garrison and territory is at present abounding in the fruits of the
earth--corn and other vegetables. Having encouraged and aided in
cultivating the land our Lord has seen proper to give us the most
fertile year ever known in these Provinces. On the 16th of this month
Don Juan, Casique of the Province of San Pedro, died--the one your
Majesty was so kind to in sending him two hundred ducats which were
given him. I feel his death very much as he was one of the most faithful
and influential in this Territory; he was sagacious and practical,
having faith, and agreed in all that you ordered. He died as a good
Christian, receiving the sacraments and giving a good example at the
hour of his death to all the Indians and natives. His niece becomes his
heir; according to their custom the nieces and nephews become the heirs
and not the children.

Fray Baltazar Lopez, of the Franciscan order, has arrived from New
Spain. He was crippled and sick, so I gave him permission to go to New
Spain where he was cured and has regained his health which has been a
great happiness for me as he is greatly needed in the conversion. He has
brought many to a realization of the truth of Christianity, and I trust
in God he

[Illustration: Land Approach to Fort Marion.]

may keep well and continue his good work. In this I try to aid him as
much as possible and with some of the officers and soldiers go to visit
the Indians from time to time to assure them of our good will and to
trade with them. They have just brought from New Spain the five hundred
ducats your Majesty gave in charity to the hospital of this City,
established for the benefit of the poor soldiers of this Garrison. They
also brought five hundred more from Mexico for the Franciscan Convent,
and we have also given to said Convent two thousand eight hundred and
forty-two reals which were in this Treasury and which were found on the
beach of San Mateo from some of the vessels wrecked on that shore, and
although your Royal Cedula said it should be three thousand and
forty-two reals and a half, the Royal Officers have not been able to
find that much on your books, only the amount stated above which was
delivered to them for the repairs of the convent. If your Majesty wishes
to obtain information regarding Jacon from England you must ask for it
by the name of Virginia which is the name given it by the English; if
you inquire for Jacon you will get no satisfaction. I send with this a
duplicate of the letter written you on February 28th by Pedro Alvarez
Castillon via Havana, on the fleet in command of General Sancho Pardo,
and as the sea is an uncertain thing I send a duplicate. The frigate
which carries this paper and those of the Auditor, Pedro Redondo,
belongs to Pedro Gonzales, of Havana, who also goes on her. Should you
wish to send dispatches for this Province, Havana or New Spain, this
vessel is very appropriate; it is good, small, and sails fast, being of
only fifteen tons, and Pedro Gonzales is perfectly familiar with all
this coast and is a practical and experienced sailor and can be trusted
with anything you wish to send by him. I cannot fail to remind you to
grant me a reasonable sum for expenditures of this Garrison, as the
expenses are so heavy I am obliged to implore this grace of your
Majesty.

May God preserve you in health for the good of Christianity.

GONZALO MENENDEZ CANSO.

St. Augustine, Fla., June 28th, 1600.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wrote your Majesty by General Sancho Pardo, giving full and detailed
account of how I had arranged matters and placed in office as Auditor of
the Custom House, of this City, Pedro Redondo, my son, a person
perfectly trustworthy, competent and reliable. I have done everything
according to your Majesty’s orders. I came to the Province of Florida on
the fleet, as you graciously ordered me to investigate the accounts of
your Royal Officers and other employees. I arrived in Florida on the
29th of March, presented my commissions, which were accepted by the
Governor, Gonzalo Menendez. On the 14th of April, after making all
inquiries necessary regarding the accounts, I commenced to investigate,
not meeting from the Officers that respect which is shown by the army
and navy to your Royal employees. Their books being in such a disordered
condition, it will take more time than I calculated to finish these
investigations, but I will accomplish them with all possible speed. As I
have informed your Majesty through others who the persons are, having to
give account and the many and arduous difficulties encountered, there
being among auditors, agents and shipmasters, about twenty persons--it
will take a longer time to accomplish, although I came quite encouraged
and desirous of finishing speedily so as to return to Havana to attend
the grand artillery review and take my command. I left town for the term
of one year, but find I shall be unable to complete these investigations
in that time, as it is impossible to leave them in the muddled condition
they are at present. Doctor Juan Gonzales, of the Royal Court of the
Indias, has told me he could obtain with the consent of the Governor, a
prerogative. I implore your Majesty will send this prerogative and see
and notify me as to what I am to do. As I have been here so short a time
I cannot inform you of all that you ordered me to investigate. All I can
say at present is that there are about two hundred and fifty soldiers in
this Garrison; they are good and well drilled and disciplined; that the
Governor has planted and under cultivation many acres of land, which
will be a great help in the sustenance of these people, who are mostly
married, and whose small wages and rations given them does not suffice
for their support. They certainly need this grain. Besides others,
seeing the good results and what good land it is, are following the
example and are clearing and planting fields. With the cutting down of
the timber it has done away with the vast quantities of mosquitoes and
has helped to improve the City, as one sees on all sides houses in
course of construction. The greatest difficulty I find is the difference
existing between the Officers of the Royal command and the people. As
you have ordered that all should obey them, they are overbearing, as
occurs in many other places. If you could devise some remedy for this,
all would go well. I shall continue to keep you advised of all that
occurs, especially on the matter of investigations and as to who the
guilty parties may be. May God grant you a long life of prosperity.

FRANCISCO REDONDO VILLEGAS.

St. Augustine, Florida, April 18th, 1600.




CHAPTER VI.

A. D. 1605-1608.

     _Minutes of a Bull to be presented to the Holy See, asking
     concession of graces and powers for Catholic residents in
     Florida--Minorcan families brought a Priest and Monk with them, and
     wish privileges and new license granted--Instructions as to duties
     on wine--Priests and Monks of Tasco use municipal monies for their
     own interests--Advises change in office of Treasurer of the Royal
     chest--Loss of vessels carrying papers for his Majesty--People of
     the Kingdom gratified at favor shown by his Majesty to Don
     Francisco--Letter from Pedro Ibarra to his Majesty--Insufficient
     support for the Garrison--A widow, who was the wife of two Army
     Captains, in need--Two poor soldiers find amber in a fish for which
     Menendez exacted a duty--Anxiety on account of French and English
     pirates--Some taken prisoners and ten hanged--Several Casiques and
     chiefs visit Augustine--Are impressed with religious services and
     procession--Ask for Friars to return to their country with them to
     instruct their people--Asks for men to assist in building a fort at
     the mouth of Miguel Moro--Has made inquiry as to origin and source
     of River San Mateo and Lake Miami--A Garrison of warlike
     people--Proposition to establish a Manager of the Inquisition to
     control them--Does not wish to let go certain Priest and
     Captain--Report of Juan Menendez Marquez to the King--Deplores the
     decision to reduce the Garrison--Advises return to the policy of
     Pedro Menendez, his cousin--Desires permission to go to Spain to
     more fully lay the matter before his Majesty._

A. D. 1605.




Minutes of the Bull or Supplication which the Minister of this Court in
Rome should present to the Holy See, asking for the concession of new
graces and powers in favor of the Catholic residents in Florida, which
precepts have been formulated by the Judge complying with the Royal
Decree of your Majesty in consultation with the Council.

As formal instructions they should state that these Minorcan families
transmigrated to Florida under the English dominion, but with the free
use and privilege of their Catholic Religion. They carried with them as
spiritual directors Don Pedro Campos, secular Priest, and Padre
Bartolome Casanovas, a Monk, that these, for the legitimate discharge of
their Ministerial duties, repair to the Holy See, begging they be
constituted Pastor of that flock, dispensing them all the powers
necessary, that your Holiness benignantly accede to their urgent
petition, to grant them different privileges and powers, among others
the administering to that Catholic people all the sacraments, even those
not Parochial, except confirmation and Orders, extending this privilege
for a term of three years when they shall obtain a new license from the
superior Prelates or Bishop nearest to Florida. That is what has been
done, because I have received a new Cedula from your Majesty ordering
that the proceeds of the duties on wine should not be spent on anything
but the bringing of water. I cease, satisfied, that before suspending
the execution of this Cedula. I shall take time to inform your Majesty
that it was necessary for me to avail myself of this money for these
purposes. I do not at present send an account, until I can send it
finished, that it may not be a work which the Viceroy may consider
impossible to accomplish at so small a cost. I beg of your Majesty to
consider it. Otherwise I shall obey to the letter this Cedula and I
await your reply. Not receiving a reply, I shall take for granted that
your Majesty is satisfied. Being so general and important in this
Kingdom the practise of other business, and there being a possibility of
misunderstanding in this matter, I resolved to visit some of the
vineyards of this kingdom, and so I went to Tasco, some twenty-eight
leagues from this city, taking advantage of the Christmas holidays, not
to lose any time from my ordinary business, it has been of great
advantage as I can state just how these things are conducted. I have
stated to your Majesty in other letters, the municipality of this City
is not governed as it should be, because the Priests or Monks think more
of their own interests, reducing all to their own profit. As this takes
place the Royal Officers cannot ordinarily attend the meetings, it would
be well that the Viceroy should elect four persons of the best standing
and principles upon whom your Majesty should bestow Government offices
and that the Viceroy should oblige them to accept, for at least four
months in the year, giving them precedence after the Royal Officers, and
thus assure their attention to matters which are looked upon
indifferently in one of the best Cities you possess, and which is
improving each day. If the Council will consider this proposition and
your Majesty pleases to execute it.

The Decree sent by me and the Official documents for the high notaries
of Government and legislative bodies of this Audience and particularly
for the notaries of the Treasury, that they might transact some
important business which was taken from the books and have been badly
attended to because there is no one to be solicitous about this matter,
and it not belonging to the duties of the Judge, it is neglected as are
other affairs. It becomes obligatory to find some faithful and
trustworthy person of influence to take charge of this Office and assign
them a salary of $800.00 a year. Show and make them understand the
anxiety which I feel concerning it and how it retards other business.
Being new in my Office I have not cared to assign any one until I had a
license from your Majesty for doing so. I shall await your decision. It
seems to me the salary could be assigned through the Legislature, and if
they neglect their duties discharge them.

In New Vera Cruz, Pedro Casco Calderon has been serving as Treasurer of
the Royal Chest by nomination of your Majesty, he also occupied other
Offices in Spain. He is old, the many years of service at that Post and
the conduct of his wife, have disturbed his mind; he is also running a
butcher shop and other enterprises not in accordance with the Royal
Office. The situation is such that nothing should be concealed from you.
In being served you might give him some small Office at home, and I
should remove him to some other place, if I did not understand the
necessity of his attending to his estate, which is in that
neighborhood, and all his other profitable enterprises.

The first registered vessel was lost on the coast of Campeachy, and
although the Papers for your Majesty were taken out, they had been under
water so long that they were useless, scarcely legible. The second
vessel of advice was taken by the French on its return from Saona, and
they stripped it of everything, leaving vessel and crew in such a ruined
condition they could proceed no further than Santo Domingo. Seeing that
they were lost they threw the papers for your Majesty overboard. Thus it
becomes necessary that one and the other be duplicated. Your Majesty
will please see that the person in Sevilla who has charge of these
vessels be careful of the person to whom he entrusts these Documents as
so far the person in charge does not seem to understand their
importance, and so, it is only miraculous that we get them at all. It
has been very gratifying to all in this Kingdom the favor shown by your
Majesty to Don Francisco. I trust he will serve you well and faithfully.
It is prohibited that an Alderman should serve a private individual
under penalty of losing his Office. In this city Don Luis Maldona, son
of Maldona who was Judge of this Supreme Court, has a regiment. On
account of his talent and the good services he can render I have him
occupied in my service, and that he may not fall under the penalty of
the law I implore your Majesty to send him a permit that he may attend
to both, or a license that he may resign his place in the regiment and
serve your Majesty otherwise, on a salary that you shall name. I
consider the first plan best. Don Luis Valasco has arrived and I
thought best to introduce him and have some attention bestowed upon him,
on account of his position. I shall show him all respect and visit him,
feeling sure you will thus be well served. The case is free of
consequences. Having sent you a letter of dispatch through the Supreme
Court of Castile stating that Dr. Lievana will go over to that Kingdom
and render an account of the expenses of the residence and trip of the
first Lieutenant of Assistencia of Sevilla. Dr. Lievana acted as Mayor
in the interim between the death of Señor Trufillo and your appointing
Don Francisco de Onate. He is a person who will render you good service,
he can be relied on, is among the noblest here, and could fill any
office. I have detained this vessel that I might inform you of the
departure of the vessel for the Philippines.

May God preserve you for many years.

THE MARQUEZ OF MONTES CLARAS.

Mexico, March 31st, 1605.

(There is a Rubrica.)

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1605.

_Sire:_

I sent your Majesty one of your royal Cedulas dated in Valladolid, April
3rd, in which I laid before your Majesty the necessity and want these
poor married men are in. It is impossible for them to support
themselves; there are seven and eight in a family to be fed on the
father’s rations. As I have before stated to you, it would be a great
charity as well as a service to God to help them that they may not
perish. This may be remedied when the other people arrive. I can then
give permission to the valetudinarians and sick to return home, your
Majesty having sent as a reward for so many years of service the means
to defray the cost of the voyage. I can give according to the condition
of each one and to the married men who remain here in service please
order an extra half ration for each child with some other slight
assistance while they serve as soldiers and their daughters are too
young to marry. I assure you that aside from being a great charity it
will be no more than justice, as they are among the best soldiers I have
ever seen on land or sea. Among the necessities your Majesty may see
proper to relieve is the suffering of a lady of standing, widow of two
captains who served many years in this Province and who had charge of it
in the absence of the Governors. Aid given here will be one of the
greatest of charities, as before stated. The negroes who were here for
over forty years, working in the Havana forces, have died, and it will
be well to send about a dozen more and three or four negro women.

Your order that I should not collect from the New Spain more than was
necessary I have carried out so far, and I wish to remind you to send a
trustworthy accountant as the one at present occupying that office is
not fitted for it. During the residence of Gonzalo Menendez Canso, the
Treasurer, Juan Menendez, asked and exacted that duty should be paid
your Majesty on some amber which Bartolaine Perez and Gaspar Martin,
soldiers, had found in a fish’s craw, and with promises which Gonzalo
Menendez made the soldiers, he palliated them and said the duty must be
paid according to one of the chapters of royal instruction. At that time
we could not ascertain if it were true. The said soldiers had already
put in a plea to the said Gonzalo Menendez and as interested parties
could not be witnesses in these investigations. The other person through
whose hands it must pass was Lieutenant Fabeicio Lopez, and he was not
here. He has returned now and makes the accompanying declaration, which
you can place with the declaration of the soldiers, and you can have
your duties and give the soldiers what was taken from them, not allowing
them to make a manifestation. The Treasurer has asked me to let him use
a permit he has to go to that kingdom on business and solicitations. I
have not allowed him to use it, because we are so much in need of men
and there are so few I can put my hand on in case of need. God protect
your Majesty.

PEDRO IBARRA.

Dec. 26th, 1605, St. Augustine, Florida.

       *       *       *       *       *


A. D. 1607.

_Sire_:

In a letter of the 22nd of January of the present year, which was sent
from Havana with a notice of the death of Governor Don Pedro Acuna I
have forwarded you, I have also notified you of what I thought of doing
with the French and English pirates I held as prisoners. One day after
the departure of the boat I sent to have them hanged, using with them
such religious treatment as is customary. Ten of them were baptized, the
others stated they had already been baptized. It seems that all died as
Christians, so that this whole City with their fraternities turned out
to lay them out and bury them. I only wish that with these pirates we
might put an end to them all on these coasts. There are so many they
keep me in great anxiety and I implore you to send me people to destroy
them. I have every one on this coast enlisted to aid in their
destruction. But my experience is that many have not only sheltered
them, saved their lives and estates, but continue to serve them and
allow them to come and go at will. They come from a distance of a
hundred leagues with all confidence and safety. This week, which is Holy
week, I have had here several Casiques and Chiefs who are the lords of
the mouth of Miguel Mora, where, I have before told you, we should erect
a fort and from there capture the fleet of Charles. I shall tell you the
names of these Casiques that you may know who they are and the great
achievement I have made in gaining their services. They have returned to
their country dressed and very happy and edified with the religious
services and processions they have witnessed during this Holy season.
They ask for Friars to instruct them. I told them I would come there to
visit them. I notify you that this is the time that with more security
and less cost a fort could be built there; they themselves would act as
peons, and if possible to do so I would myself ask that from Havana they
would send me an engineer and eighty men with two launches. Look into
this, as I am quite sure they would all lend themselves to serve in the
building, as they would feel safe all along that coast from the
invasions of the enemy. The other Provinces are very peaceful. With the
warriors, silver miners and woodmen I have so long asked your Majesty to
send me. I trust in God that we can touch with our hands the great
wealth we surely have in the interior of this land. All this I ask of
you I am moved to do by the zeal to serve you and enlarge your estate
and not for rest or gain. From all these parts I have had here this week
over five hundred Indians, and, God knows, to make them understand it,
will require more men than I have in our Order to guide them.

In a letter of September 23rd your Majesty commands me to make every
possible inquiry to know the origin and source of the River San Mateo
and Lake Miami. As I have always tried to make inquiries, about six
months ago I discovered on the southern coast a river which I have had
examined by three different pilots, and find that it has nine fathoms of
water at the entrance of a much wider river. I notified your Majesty of
this new river. This garrison is composed of a warlike people and the
Friars of San Francisco are thinking of establishing a Manager of the
Inquisition to subject them and control their passions. When I came here
these warriors were in great want and I have come to an agreement
together with the Royal Officers, that we should have Juan Nunez go to
Castilla and try to make terms with some merchant to remedy these
occurrences. To Fray Pedro Ruiz they have brought an Order from your
Majesty in which you command me to let him go to Castilla on account of
his age and failing health; that he is of no further use. It seems to me
this Friar has not been here so many years and he is perfectly sound and
fresh and robust, never having had so much as a headache.

Captain Alonzo de las Alas has presented me a Cedula from your Majesty
which gives him permission to go to Castilla for a term of two years
and that during that time he is to receive no salary. He claims that it
is an oversight in not appointing some one in his place and allowing him
to draw his salary as heretofore and which is just, because whoever
takes his place is entitled to half of his pay, and for this it will be
necessary that your Majesty order Bartolome Arruchas to return to his
Post as the permit granted him by your Majesty has expired.

God protect your Majesty.

PEDRO IBARRA.

May 16th, 1607, St. Augustine, Fla.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1608.

_Your Lordship:_

Through a letter of September 20th of last year, 1602, and an account
rendered the Bishop of Cuba (the past year of 1606) who came to confirm
the Spanish Christians not yet confirmed and the native Indians of these
Provinces, I told him all that I thought would be most convenient to the
service of God our Lord and your Majesty regarding the conversion of
this Garrison to which I again refer, it having come to my knowledge
that your Royal Council did not repeat it to you, fearing to tire or
annoy you. Now, on learning the resolution you have taken of reforming
this Garrison and reducing it to one hundred and fifty infantry, I am
sure you have listened to the advice of persons who have never seen this
coast, nor do they know anything about the interior of the country, nor
the great benefits which have been accomplished in the conversion of the
natives who are idolaters and savages, hesitating at no crime however
horrible.

If Gonzalo Menendez Canso were moved with the true zeal of God and a
proper desire to serve your Majesty it would have been no more than just
that when he first assumed control of this Government he should have
given you a full and detailed account of the existing state of affairs
and sought your advice and not waited until he was quite sure that his
Office was to be filled by some one else.

Again, I decided to write this to implore you to consider and look
closely into the matters upon which I have advised you and which I have
done in all truth and fidelity as I am obliged to for my King. Knowing
also that the King of glorious memory, your father, had more trouble and
combats than at present on account of economy and the abandoning of this
Garrison, he never listened to such things; on the contrary, in the time
of Governor General Pedro Menendez Marquez, my first cousin, he
increased the force to one hundred and fifty soldiers of Infantry and by
thus assigning them to this Post their aid and succor succeeded in
subjugating the Indians and in bringing and attracting them to hear the
Holy Gospel, and listen to the words of the Friars who preached. This is
a public truth. And since that time no Governor has made any conquests
or discoveries, nor gone in person to treat with the Indians nor draw
them towards civilization by gifts or other means. And if you would at
least grant us a Garrison of defense of three hundred Infantry and
thirty marines besides the Friars, Governor and Royal officials, with
orders that they proceed to ferret out the secrets of the interior of
the country, where Lieutenant Mocana entered, and in which latitude
there can no doubt be found an excellent port, particularly at Cayagua,
where any Armada could with safety enter in an altitude of thirty-three
and one-fourth degrees, and where I have myself been in the past year of
1588. Should it prove advantageous and convenient in the Bay of the
Mother of God, of Macan, at a height of thirty-seven degrees at its
mouth, and which terminates at the foot of the mountain range where I
was also, in the same year, in search of the English settlement. It is a
more sheltered harbor than this one and nearer for obtaining aid, and an
entrance could be made through the Province of Guale in the land of
Tulufino, which corresponds with that called Tama, on the skirts of the
mountain range. It might be a very advantageous move which would result
in the glory of God and your Majesty’s interest; for if we could bring
these people to honor the Governor of the garrison and when they found
that he was working for their good and not the contrary, there would
naturally result a reform among the enemies and we might aspire to carry
out your designs in a satisfactory manner. Under existing circumstances
it is impossible for this Garrison, composed of so few men, to march out
or in any way try to defend themselves against the enemy, and nothing
remains but to die bravely defending the Garrison as best they can, and
when there remains no one else to defend it, it leaves the Friars and
converted Indians to the mercy of God, for it is the only help they can
look to, the Forts and Castles of Flanders being so far away they would
be slow to respond. If there is to be no more infantry sent I think it
would be well to agree upon making this Fort a ravelin and build a good
trench of defense along the coast to prevent the enemy from jumping
over and in every possible way attend to the preservation of all the
above mentioned regarding the Friars and converted natives. Put a stop
to all these ambushes and skirmishes and other nuisances which oblige
them (the natives) to leave their settlements and fortify themselves
upon your domains and do great damage to vessels coming in and going out
at the mouth of the Bahama channel, making it unsafe all along the coast
of this part of the Indies, possessed by your Majesty and which you will
possess for many years for the glory of God and the welfare of the souls
of these poor natives, and may His Divine Majesty not permit these
arbitrations and troubles caused by a few men who are incited by their
passions and own selfish interests and with the pretext of saving you
some twenty or thirty thousand dollars cause such great trouble that
your expenses will be more than doubled in repairing the damage. You
support and maintain the Garrisons of Havana and Porto Rico from rents
and taxes of New Spain and it is not just nor proper to put difficulties
in your way to prevent you from preserving and sustaining in the same
way this one which should be well defended as it is a Port from whence
you can pass through those same inland regions to Mexico, and, in my
opinion, it is very important to preserve it for this purpose. Havana is
of importance, being the key to the Indias and a place where the Armadas
and fleets can replenish and repair to continue their voyages through
these Kingdoms. With all humility I beg you receive my zeal and good
wishes which is to always serve you with fidelity and truth as has been
done by my parents, and if on this occasion I did not call your
attention to these matters, which are of vast import, I should be
committing a crime, and in all this I subject myself to better judgment
and implore your Majesty with all humility that as I can be of no other
use in this Post, but to serve as Treasurer of these Provinces, which I
am at present doing, you will consider my application and give me
permission to go to Spain and render an account of the Royal finances
intrusted to my care since June of the past year of 1602, hereafter and
for this purpose that I be given receipts of my charge, and that during
my absence from this Port the employment be at the risk and account of
the person left in my place, and who must give bond as is customary in
vacations of similar Posts and offices and at the same time that the
Governor provide that he be given one half of the salary and that I
receive the other half as a means of helping me to defray my expenses,
and if my mind does not deceive me my services are deserving of it for
the care and anxiety I have suffered in this Garrison by wishing to
defend the cause of the profit of the Royal finance of your Majesty and
the desire that I have of settling my accounts, not only those I have of
my own, but also those of Pedro Redondo which will seem to have been
given with pay, which will be the case with those I render if God will
give me life for it to employ in your Royal Service. May God grant you
many and happy years for the mercy and defense of the faith, the
preservation of peace and tranquility of many more kingdoms, and the
conversion of as many idolaters as are in these parts.

JUAN MENENDEZ MARQUEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., January 5th, 1608.




CHAPTER VII.

A. D. 1622-1640.

     _Report of Antonio Benavides to his Majesty--Endeavored to execute
     order of the King to establish friendly relations with the English
     of the Carolinas--Sent Don Francisco Menendez together with other
     Officers--The Mission a failure owing to the English not having
     instruction from London--Find that the English have built fort on
     Spanish territory--Requested its removal in order to avoid trouble
     between the two nations--The English Governor refused--Matter fully
     laid before his Majesty--Report of Luis De Rojas--Frigate sent from
     Augustine to Havana to help fleet from New Spain bring over
     supplies for Garrison--They discover thirteen vessels, which proves
     to be an enemy who give chase to the Frigate--The pilot and
     soldiers landed, followed by the enemy, until a forest is reached,
     where the enemy leaves them--Returning to their launches the enemy
     strip the Frigate and burn the hull--The enemy coast along shore
     frightening the Indians, lodging in their huts--A large force of
     Indians were gathered together with one hundred and fifty soldiers
     to pursue the enemy at which they reembark and sail away--A Spanish
     Frigate arrives bearing forty-seven persons, all that was left of
     three vessels which had been captured by the enemy who proved to be
     bearing provisions to a Dutch Fleet in Havana--Recommends his
     Majesty to build a fort at the Bar at the place called Jega--Report
     of Luis Ussitinez to his Majesty--The Mandate of the King has been
     carried out in regard to prayer to God for the success of the
     King’s arms taken up against France--1636--An account of a meeting
     of the Board of the City Council of Havana at which a clergyman of
     the Holy Office of the Inquisition appears with an Auto from the
     Senior Commissionado, Don Francisco de las Casas, of the Holy
     Office of this city, containing instructions as to certain
     ceremonies in connection with the Inquisition._

_Your Lordship:_

By your Royal dispatch of last year you ordered me to immediately
establish friendly relations with the English of the Carolinas, and that
your Majesty had asked that the Court of London should pass efficacious
measures to have the order repeated, which was given in virtue of the
suspension of arms between your Majesty’s crown and that of England, to
the end that these vessels be not disturbed by the English of the
Carolinas, nor the Indians of their Province, so that they may derive
the benefits of the land and live in tranquility and love as your
Majesty desires. That for this purpose I should in my ministerial
capacity go to the Governor of Carolina instigating him to make them
observe punctually the treaty of suspension of arms. I executed this
order immediately and sent the Auditor Don Francisco Menendez
accompanied by other Officers of the Garrison of this Post, with orders
to adjust a firm agreement with the Governor that on the part of the
English they should cease to incite the Indians, and thus they and the
laborers might live without injury one from the other; that this
agreement was equally important for both Nations. To this proposition,
and others certified, in the testimony of the letter which the referred
to Don Francisco Menendez carried and on this occasion I remit to you.
The Governor and parliament of the Carolina replied that they had
received no orders from the King of Great Britain, but that
notwithstanding they would try to maintain friendly relations with this
Government during the suspension of arms. Immediately upon the arrival
of Auditor Don Francisco Menendez in Carolina, he was informed that the
English had built a wooden fort at the mouth of Talaje, one of your
Provinces, where for many years were settled the Indians, and on account
of the blockade we put upon it, they retired. Don Francisco immediately
demanded of the Governor and Parliament the reason for building there;
that it was your Majesty’s Territory, etc., and stating that it might
cause trouble between the two Nations and once that war was started it
would be difficult to stop on account of the Indians. His reply was
simply that to secure his dominions from invasion and harm, the King of
Great Britain had ordered it built, and that they should found Towns in
the best and most approved manner. The Auditor requested its removal
from your Territory, but they refused to do so, stating that his orders
were not sufficient, and expressed nothing whatever in regard to this
Fort. I infer that with the incoming of this new Governor in the
Carolinas, not only will the Fort be completed, but they will settle all
the Islands belonging to your jurisdiction, and thus make the Carolinas
impregnable and reduce this Garrison to a more lamentable condition
than it is, and the Indians watching their opportunities will come upon
us and also takes sides with the English, who will supply them with arms
and ammunition, a thing they most ardently desire. The Auditor was also
informed that in the Carolinas they were waiting the arrival of large
quantities of arms and ammunition from England. They can in time of war
easily invade this Castle, the only desire and aim they have, on account
of the great importance it would be to the preservation of their
colonies in this New England and the facility it would give them for
capturing vessels coming and going through the Bahama Channel, the
nearness of this Castle being just what they most desire. In giving you
this information I not only appease my conscience but fulfilled my
obligations to you by showing you the great danger which threatens you
and the terrible results it might cause, and I leave it to the
intelligence of your Royal Highness to act in this matter as best
pleases you.

May God save you.

ANTONIO BENAVIDES.

St. Augustine, Fla., April 21st, 1622.

       *       *       *       *       *


1627


_Sire_:

After having written your Majesty giving an account of having faithfully
fulfilled all the instructions of your different Royal Cedula, I will,
in this, give a detailed account of what occurred on August 25th of this
year. I ordered Captain Diego del Pozo to embark in one of the frigates
of your Majesty’s Service in this Garrison, and proceed to Havana, to
help bring over the supply for this Garrison, which was to come on the
fleet from New Spain. Following his journey and coasting along these
Provinces, near the Cape of Canaveral, on Sunday, the 13th of September,
in the morning, he discovered thirteen vessels, ten large ones and three
smaller ones. Believing it to be the Fleet, he made signals and hoisted
the flag, but as no answer was returned he saw clearly that it was the
enemy. At the same time one of their three smaller vessels came forward
and gave him chase. The Frigate being small went so near in shore that
the vessel could not reach it, seeing which they lowered two rowboats to
chase and attack the Frigate, each boat carrying twelve soldiers and ten
mariners. The Frigate resisted the attack with arquebuses. The enemy not
making any headway, called for more aid, which was sent them by two more
larger launches with a hundred men. Captain Diego del Pozo finding
himself in such a tight place, and the pilot and soldiers thinking they
would stand a better chance on land, he decided to land. The enemy
followed close, he fought them step by step until they came to a thick
forest, when the enemy decided to leave them. The skirmish lasted about
two hours. On returning to their launches the enemy first stripped the
Frigate of all they wanted and burned the hull. When Captain Pozo saw
that he would have to abandon the ship, he threw the two pieces of
artillery he carried overboard. All this occurred about forty leagues
from this Garrison. In a few days I was notified of this misfortune and
I sent a launch with infantry to get the men from the Frigate. All
arrived safely without the loss of a single man. I had the testimony
taken and ascertained the truth and found that the Captain and his men
were here and did their duty faithfully. Further proof and truth was
ascertained a few days later from the soldiers I sent by land to
reconnoitre the coast where the Frigate was lost--they brought word that
the thirteen vessels which had been sent to chase the Frigate were
coasting along slowly taking on water and wood. They had disembarked and
taken up lodging in the Indian huts, the Indians fleeing with fear.
Some, by gifts, had been induced to return, others came to me for
protection. Following this, I received further news that three of the
thirteen vessels were lost and the crew on land. This proved not to be
true--in going over the Bar three launches were lost and a few of the
men drowned. Feeling it was not right to have the enemy land on your
Majesty’s domain, where we are at present safe and on friendly relations
with the Indians, I immediately gave orders and gathered a large force
of Indians and, with a hundred and fifty of our men, I set out
determined to find the enemy and thrust them out. I appointed Captain
Melchar Durante to take command here during my absence, he being an old
man of much experience. I was continuing my pursuit of the enemy when I
received news of their having re-embarked and sailed off, so I returned
sending one of the Sergeants with a squad of twenty men to the Bar, and
that they might recover the three launches if they were worth it. This
they did promptly, returning with two of the launches in fair condition,
the third they left as it was too badly injured to be of use. They
brought the same news of the enemy’s proceedings. On the 20th of said
month a Frigate arrived. On sending out to recognize her, we found it to
be Spanish. It was one of the fleet which was overtaken by the enemy
and brought in forty-seven persons, mariners and passengers, among them
an Augustinian Monk. It was what was left of the three vessels taken by
the enemy of the thirteen vessels. They were captured off Cape San
Antonio. On one of the vessels were the papers and information sent by
the Viceroy to Don Carlos Ybarra, General of the Spanish fleet, which
was coming from Spain. They captured it near Cape Catoche, and the
papers for General Ybarra and your Majesty were thrown overboard to
prevent the enemy from getting them. They were in the enemy’s power for
twelve days, when they put them on this small Frigate with scant
rations, and told them they were free to come to this Garrison, where
they arrived half-starved. I took them in and fed them at your Majesty’s
expense, as part of them had lost their lives in your service and they
were your vassals. They remained here a month, and on the first
opportunity which presented itself, I gave them passage for Havana.
Among the forty-six persons were four pilots and four boatswain who gave
a long account of what they heard while prisoners. They particularly
spoke of the Armada in charge of Tomas Raspuro, which they had been
waiting for, but on seeing so many large vessels of war and knowing they
would be outnumbered, they desisted and retired along the coast--it was
then they captured these three frigates of this Garrison of which I have
given you detailed account. These Pilots informed me that these thirteen
vessels came with supplies and ammunition and provisions for the Dutch
fleet, which was in Havana, but they learned it had departed and they
were too late. Being unable to assault our Fleet as she entered the
mouth of the channel, they decided to take one of the Pilots who was
experienced in the Honduras waters and there await the Admiral and
Captain of our fleet and make them prisoners. They questioned them the
whole time they were prisoners and asked their advice, finally turning
them loose on the small frigate, so that it was a miracle they were
saved. The thirteen vessels were manned by very young men, most of them
boys, and they could not tell the name of the squadron, but the Admiral
was Pedro Yanez, a German, a native of Amsterdam. They got all the
information possible regarding this Garrison, and say that next summer
they will come and ransack and burn the City. At that time there were
only forty men, less than the three hundred you should always maintain
here--so, I selected others, forced them into service and have them
drilled and armed. I have given you a full account of all the happenings
on the coast this summer. I hope I have done so, as a good vassal, and
for this reason I should warn and advise your Majesty to build a Fort at
the Bar at a place they call Jega--it being the place where vessels all
come to cast anchor when they want to take on water, wood, and to await
the merchant ships and others they wish to capture. Many of your ships
and nearly all those bringing supplies to this Garrison are lost in this
way. A Fort at this place would act as a sentinel, and guard against
their landing and helping themselves. It would also be well to have it
in case of vessels being wrecked along this coast, as so many are, to be
able to rescue and save the crews and passengers, who so often perish at
the hands of pirates and cruel Indians. One cannot trust the Indians,
they are children born of traitors. I am sure the Germans would not
approach if they saw the place occupied by Spaniards. For this you would
be obliged to increase a hundred soldiers more than are in this
Garrison. Besides the men would have to be relieved from time to time
from there as the work would be arduous, and no soldier or any one could
withstand the mosquitoes which are so bad they kill the men, and destroy
much of the food. The cost of this Fort you would have to send some one
to estimate. I could not feel that I had properly complied with my duty
until I have notified you of this great and urgent need. Hoping your
Majesty may spend many happy years, as your vassals need you.

LUIS DE ROJAS.

St. Augustine, Fla., February 13th, 1627.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1636.


_Sire_:

By a Cedula of your Royal Highness, dated in Madrid, on the 28th of June
of last year, you command me to have a general offering of prayer in all
the churches in the district under my command, imploring God that you
may be successful in the arms you have taken up against France, on
account of her evil designs against you. You also recommend that I
improve the conduct and manners of the people here; that if necessary I
punish them publicly for their offences. I immediately complied with
your order, and had them go out from the high church in procession,
those of the Seraphic Order joining with all the others. They went
through all the streets of the City, then a high mass was sung, and
prayers offered for your success. I also sent a message to all the
other Churches and Convents to have like services celebrated. In regard
to the conduct of the residents of these Province, Spaniards as well as
natives, I have great care in every respect, and from today, complying
with your Mandate, I shall redouble my vigilance. May God spare your
Majesty many years, for the good of Christianity.

LUIS USSITINEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla.

       *       *       *       *       *

Havana, A. D. 1640.

In the city of Havana on the 13th day of April, 1678, there was a
meeting of the Board in the Hall of the City Council as is usual and
customary. The Master of the Field, Don Francisco Davila, Governor and
Captain-General of said City, and the Messrs. Nicolas Castellan,
Lieutenant-Major Don Pedro Valdes, Don Pedro Recio de Oquendo, First
Alderman, Captain Don Blas Pedraso.

In the presence of the Notary, the following was agreed:

They had begun to discuss some business when there was a rap at the
door, the Governor rang the bell, the porter opened the door and said
that outside was the Lieutenant Don Antonio Grazeano, a noted clergyman
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition, that he brought a message from
the Inquisition for his Lordship of the Board. He sent this youngest
Alderman with the Secretary to receive him, as he came in the name of
the Inquisition. Entering and having been seated in the midst of the
Aldermen, he announced that he brought an Auto from the Señor
Commissionado, Don Francisco de las Casas, of the Holy Office of this
City. He was told to read it, which he did, and delivered it. His
Lordship asked that he give testimony of his authority in order to agree
upon the matter of which it treated, and for the better veneration of
God and of so Holy a Tribunal. Don Antonio Glaziano drew forth from his
pocket a folded paper which he delivered in my, the Notary’s’ presence.
Opening it, it contained a sheet of paper, the first leaf of which was
written on both sides, signed, it appeared, by the said Don Antonio
Graziano. This duty performed, he arose and left, accompanying him to
the door, the same ones who received him, and I, the present Notary. The
door being closed his Lordship ordered inserted to the letter the
testimony, the tenor of which is as follows:

In the City of Havana on the same day, Dr. Francisco de las Casas,
“Comissionado” of the Holy Office of the Inquisition in the City of
Carthagena, said: That last Sunday, the eighth of the current month,
seeming to him opportune, and by order of the Holy Tribunal for which
purpose he warned and made known to the present Notary and all the
gentlemen of the Board, that they might concur to their duty as ordered
by your Majesty, preceding these courtesies and compliments.

That on the day appointed they should go from the residence of the Lord
Comissionado to the Holy Parochial Church of this City, in the order
referred in the testimony given by the present Notary. The function
terminated, they should leave the church, return to the residence of the
Lord Comissionado. It seems they wished to alter this form at the gates
and places they had been, and, as on the day of the Anathema the same
celebration must be repeated, the Lord Comissionado wished, with the
best intentions, and not to be lacking in the form observed by the
Tribunal for said act to which they should cling, this was entirely for
the reasons of his Office and to avoid public altercations, from which
originate unnecessary noise and unrest, contrary to the decency and
gravity of this Tribunal. This is well known to the Tribunal and Board
of said City, it must be done in the following manner: That the Board
should come in this form to the residence of the Lord Commissionado and
conduct him to the church, he going by the side of the Governor, the
other ministers each one between two Aldermen, according to the Office
and time of service and somewhat in advance of this Lord Commissionado
and Governor with the standard of the Faith which must be carried by the
person of greatest authority who should be present. The balls of the
standard by the next in authority. That on arriving at the church the
priests must come out to receive them, sprinkling them with holy water,
and conduct them to their seats, which shall be in the High Chapel, on
the Gospel side, in a chair covered with velvet and a carpet at the
feet. Consecutively, next to the Governor and Lord Commissionado on a
covered bench, the High Constable and other attendants and ministers of
the Holy Office. That the Governor and Board are to be seated thus the
day of publication, on the Gospel side; that the Lord Commissionado
should be the preferred in all things; that at the hour for leaving, the
Notary accompanied by two attendants, will mount the pulpit and from
thence he shall swear them in, in a loud voice, to the oath of Faith.
This finished, they are to take the Lord Commissionado back to his
residence. They are to try and carry out these ceremonies in as grave
and reverential a manner as possible, this being one of the most
important ceremonies of the Holy Office of the Inquisition, and this
City belongs to its District. There are reasons for other ceremonies,
and so I, the present Notary, was ordered to witness them, that I might
give testimony and the work proceed according to the acts published, and
so that all could be reported to the Lord Inquisitadores of the Holy
Tribunal. Then it was provided and ordered to be signed.

DR. FRANCISCO DE LAS CASAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

This agrees with the original which I have in my possession, and having
consulted the matter, the following was agreed upon:

First: As regards the form in which the City, according to the acts of
Faith, must proceed to the Residence of the Lord Commissionado and
Minister of the Holy Office, as also in the public streets, we cite or
quote a Cedula from your Majesty where you refer to Don Juan Solozano,
whose political authority in Peru entitles him to have a voice, and on
this point we are warned by your Majesty to guard against the Lord
Commissionado assuming superiority of the Governor. In Peru, where the
matter was first discussed of precedence the form is as follows: The
City goes from the City Hall, as customary, to the residence of the Lord
Commissionado, where he is awaiting them in the yard. There he is
incorporated in the procession, being placed at the left of the
Governor, and all march in twos, the magistrates and constables of
longest standing given the preference, and the Ministers of the Holy
Office intermixed, but preference always to the Officers of Justice. On
arriving at the church, assigning seats and all through the ceremonies
care is taken that the greatest preference and respect be shown the
Governor, as stated in your Royal Cedula, and thus it was conducted last
Sunday in going and coming from which much discussion has arisen, as
certified in the testimony which I, the present Notary, insert to the
letter, although the Lord Commissionado states in the Auto that all
preference was given the Governor.

1640.




CHAPTER VIII.

A. D. 1655-1657.

     _An anonymous letter to his Majesty recounts the death of Governor
     Benito Ruid Salazer by a contagious sickness during the absence of
     the Sergeant Major--The office is held by two others pro tem.--They
     also died suddenly after serving a short term--Certain officials of
     the Garrison who are related meet at night and elect as Governor
     Don Pedro Ruitinez--Who intimidates the people and squanders the
     money sent for their support--The Treasurer a partner in the
     illegality, and the Judge receives hush money--This Governor
     maltreated an official who is also a soldier and a conveyor of
     monies and goods for this port from Havana, for his
     Majesty--Traffic in amber from the Indians--Taking the iron and
     implements sent to be used in repairing the Fort as money to
     purchase this amber--Declares he will consult his own pleasure
     concerning the laws of the Church, taking communion once in one and
     one-half years--A distressing condition of mismanagement--No name
     signed to the letter--A report from Diego Rebolledo, 1657,
     concerning the necessity of having an officer to guard the port for
     incoming and outgoing vessels as pirates had frequently entered and
     landed before notice could be given--Also the appointment of an
     officer and twelve infantrymen to guard other ports of the
     coast--He desists from building more fortifications because of the
     opposition of the Friars, who protested that the proximity of the
     Spaniards would retard the conversion of the Indians--The Governor
     feels that the danger is far greater to the development of his
     Majesty’s Provinces to allow the enemy a foothold in a Province as
     rich as Apalachicola--The great distance of some of the
     Provinces--Indians dying with smallpox--The burden of carrying food
     such a distance on the shoulders of men--Fray Juan Gomez reports
     (1657) of the uprising of some of the Indian Chiefs who march to
     St. Augustine and hang the Governor because of his insistance on
     their carrying heavy loads of corn into the settlement, when they,
     the Indians, had vassals to perform such labors--Reports that the
     Island of Jamaica is heavily fortified by the English who intend
     taking Cuba--These reports causing much uneasiness in these
     Provinces._


A. D. 1655.

_My Lord_:

Moved by piety, and a desire for peace and quietude, it has seemed to me
timely to notify you regarding the Government of this Province and
Garrison of St. Augustine, Fla., being as you are so high and
compassionate a Minister, who is always thinking and caring for the
welfare of his people. My Lord, Governor Benito Ruid Salazar, former
Governor of this Province, died at the time the Sergeant-Major was
absent. God, it seems, took him by a contageous sickness, and although
two others have been nominated _pro tem._, by the death of Benito Ruiz,
the reins of government were left in charge of the Auditor Nicolas Ponce
de Leon, who governed for six months more or less, when he died
suddenly. For this reason, a few of the Officials of this Garrison, who
are related, met at night in different parts of the City, and with
sufficient defamatory speech elected as Governor Don Pedro Ruitinez,
with flattering promises to those who would give their vote. When he had
been Governor one year and a half, he had given twenty-three patents of
captain, the most of them to two companies of this Garrison, four
positions as wardens of the Fort, three Sergeant-Majors said to be
andantes--three Auditors, one Treasurer--calling himself Governor and
Captain-General. In granting these patents, and other things he has
done, he has thrown down the flags, and had the artillery at the Fort
salute. He arrived here on the seventeenth of July, with the Auditor,
Treasurer, Sergeant-Major and the two captains of infantry who all left
that court at the same time. The Sergeant-Major brought a Cedula from
your Majesty, for the Governor, which he presented to Don Pedro
Ruitinez, and it was not possible to comply with it, it being a military
promotion, placing the Sergeant-Major as Governor. Don Pedro Ruitinez
had received notice that Don Diego de Rolallado had been appointed
Governor and Captain-General of this Port--he sent some friends over to
Havana to meet and entertain him during his stay in that City, and thus
Don Pedro has maintained his friendly relations with the Governor,
although he has not said a word of how he intimidated the people to
elect him Governor--nor his other doings--nor how he refused to turn
over the Government to the Sergeant-Major. But he did demand his pay.
Your Lordship, the Governor and Captain-General arrived at this
Garrison on the 18th of June, 1654, having received in Havana $20,000
sent by the Auditor and placed to the credit of this Garrison. This
money he used in Havana as follows: Goods--$7,000, gaining in this
purchase more than 200 per cent. He sent Don Alonzo Menendez with $8,000
to relieve the suffering and need of the infantry and others who are in
your service, and he sold to advantage the remaining goods. In the month
of February of this present year there arrived a vessel laden with
flour, iron implements and other goods, and although it is true that the
person in whose charge they came, brought over $40,000 to be delivered
to this treasury, he only delivered $15,000, because in Havana the
duties were so heavy and they demanded the pay. The soldier in whose
care this money and goods came, is Domingo Nunez. He spent in Havana
$2,000 on clothing, filling an order received from the Governor, and
another $2,000 in clothing he was to bring from New Spain. The Governor
after ordering this became infuriated with Domingo Nunez, cursing him,
beating and slapping him in the most unheard of manner--accusing him of
not bringing all the clothing ordered, and finally he had him placed in
the stockade on the beach. He then had the boxes and packages taken to a
neighbor’s and soldier, and opened them--finding after pricing them and
adding one-fourth more than the cost to them, that they amounted to more
than the $2,000. He then went several times to Domingo Nunez, demanded
his papers, searched them, kept him in prison, and then without cause or
reason turned him out. It is true he becomes enraged for the slightest
cause. It is a positive fact, that he and another spendthrift named
Fanfan, have sent out from his (the Governor’s) house, chocolate to be
sold on the streets by his body guards. At the time there was such great
distress and scarcity, he sent out wine to be sold at such exorbitant
prices that only those compelled to have it could buy. In this tavern of
his, the people sell cutlasses for bread, chocolate and tobacco. In the
large store, run now by Lorenzo Josi, they sell rum and clothing--a
bottle of rum costs eight dollars which is an outrage. According to
Manuel Barrios, the tavern keeper, he makes thirty-one dollars on a
cask. Since there is no more money left to buy these commodities for
cash he has adopted another method of selling them in exchange for
labor, and makes out checks for this amount. My Lord, in the month of
July of last year, there came to this Garrison a party of Indians, who
live on the coast near the Bahama Channel with a large quantity of
amber, some of which they presented to the Governor, the rest they gave
in exchange for goods, and because a few of the soldiers bought some in
exchange for clothing he was exceedingly angry. When these Indians left
the land he had them followed by two rowboats with soldiers. He finally
sent Don Alonzo Menendez with goods that he should bring him all the
amber he could obtain, he also sent out others. The Lieutenants were Don
Alonzo Menendez and Juan Dominguez and Alonzo Garcia. This trading for
amber was carried on for six months. They used up all the iron
implements. At first we thought that these implements were broken and
thrust aside as worthless, soon, however, we discovered they were used
to trade for amber, as well as five hundred tons more of iron which was
brought from New Spain. All this was paid for from your Treasury. The
amber was sold in Havana for the sum of forty thousand dollars. In the
meantime the Fort has been allowed to suffer, it is falling to pieces in
many places, the timber that was cut in the forest has rotted and the
troops’ time and iron implements are all used in the trade for amber.
The infantry and other persons drawing a salary from your Highness have
been on several occasions in a great rage with the Treasurer who abuses
them and threatens them that Don Diego Rovellado will have them killed
in the field--the guards, for the slightest offense, are beaten through
the streets, and even imprisoned in the Church of San Francisco, and at
times when he can catch them in his own house he slaps and beats them
unmercifully. In a year and a half that he has been Governor he has only
once complied with the laws of the Church, confessing and receiving the
communion publicly. He says that every one can do as he pleases; that he
does as he pleases. At the Fort he does not have the flag hoisted, only
two guards at night and their round is an easy one, but he takes the men
to guard his house every night, paying them a few dimes, and in the day
he takes others to whom he pays two or three dimes, notwithstanding that
your Majesty sends money each year to pay these men, but I am told that
Don Diego Rovellado has paid the judge some five or six thousand dollars
and he can escape free from any charge made against him. All that I
state to your Highness in this letter, you may be quite sure is the
truth, and I hope you will deem it proper to relieve your vassals from
this unnecessary suffering. May God guard you and make you happy for
many years.

NO SIGNATURE.

St. Augustine, Fla., November 20th, 1655.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1657.

_His Lordship_:

Having begun the conversion of the Indians in the Province of Apalache
at the close of the administration of Governor Louis Harristenir, who
was immediately succeeded by Dannian de las Vegas. He placed a few
soldiers in this Province to guard the going out and incoming of
vessels. Having been informed that they entered and left the Port, and
there was no one to give any report of them. This guard was kept there
during the assumption of power by Benito Ruiz Salazar and the Auditor
Nicolas Ponce de Leon, until the Sergeant-Major Don Pedro Harristenir
entered as Governor. This latter, to please the Friar, he not only
dismantled the estates of your Majesty in those parts, but he also
retired the Lieutenant and soldiers who assisted him, having no one to
administer justice to the Natives, nor to give information concerning
the Post, and so, immediately upon my taking the place of Governor,
having been informed by the General Governors and other notables who
were convened in Havana, and notified further by all the principal
people of this Garrison who demonstrated how necessary it was to have a
Lieutenant in said Province to guard and advise, as there had entered a
vessel of the enemy, and the natives had aided them and supplied them in
exchange for furs, hatchets, knives and other goods, without its being
known in this Garrison. For this reason I named to the position Captain
Antonio Sartucha and two soldiers with the instructions which I send
enclosed--so that justice might be administered to the Natives, it being
too laborious and the distance too great for them to come to this
Garrison to adjust their quarrels and differences and to guard the Port
and advise me. In a few days after his arrival he notified me of another
vessel of the enemy (pirates) who had entered the Port. He asked for aid
for infantrymen, which I sent him, to the number of forty, in command of
Captain Gregorio Bravo. Before this aid reached him, the enemy was able
to procure what they wanted. By pushing into service the natives, he was
however able to prevent them from landing. It being urgent that I should
go in person to pacify and punish the natives of the Province of
Timagua, testimony of which decrees were made. I remit them to your
Majesty. I passed on to visit the other Provinces and investigate the
condition of the harbors. I did this with the consent of all the
Casiques, and the approved judgment of Fray Francisco de San Antonio and
other Friars, with the advice also of the Treasurer of the Royal
Hacienda, and many of the reformed natives. I left in command the
Sergeant-Major Don Adrian de Canizares, being a person of experience and
trustworthy, giving him twelve infantrymen with which to defend the Port
and coast of these Ports, and that he should administer justice to the
Natives for which purpose I elected a syndicate of Friars who work in
said Province, and some of their friends. Having determined upon this at
the time you ordered me to be vigilant and careful, since the English
enemy had attempted to occupy one of the Ports of this Province,
according to information given your Majesty by Don Diego Cardenas,
ambassador to England, and had been sent to me by Field Marshal Don Juan
Montiano, Governor who was of Havana--information he gained from some
prisoners, which confirms the information you had. There has been a
fleet of the enemy on these coasts of Florida and the Bahama Channel.
Although I had intended to increase the force of soldiers, build a Fort
and found a settlement of Spaniards as I reported was agreed upon in the
visit, which testimony, and that of the taxes and good government I
remit with the decrees. I have desisted from this on account of the many
contradictions and opposition of some of the Friars, who with the
pretext that the vicinity of the Spaniards would be dangerous to the
conversion, and who do not consider that this danger has a remedy, and
it would be much more dangerous that the enemy should occupy that Port
and plant foot on your territory and fortify themselves in a province so
rich and abundant as those of Apalachicola, the knowledge of which the
enemy is sure to be fully aware, and the danger would be irreparable and
would lose in totem the conversions of these Provinces, and this
Garrison would be unable to dislodge the enemy, from the distance at
which we are, and that we could not scatter our forces, being too few of
them, besides the consequences and damage which would accrue from
pirates on the coast of Havana and the Bahama Channel--and there is no
way of reaching us under five or six days of sailing. Finally your
Lordship, the greater part of these conversions are reduced to three
Provinces where Friars officiate--they are the Provinces of Guale,
Tunnuqua and Apalache. In the two first there are few Indians, because
for some time they have been diminishing, many having died out from the
plague and small-pox which has been raging. The same is the case in
Apalache, and in a few years very few will be left, and even now the
condition they are in, it is unnecessary to assign as many Friars as
you have. Besides their conversion would long be delayed owing to the
great distance from this Garrison, the impassable roads and untold
difficulties in sending relief, even should your Majesty send the
wherewith to do so. Food must be carried eighty leagues from this
garrison to the Province of Apalache and Chacata, on the shoulders of
men--the burden is often more than they can carry. Although I have been
admonished to relieve the twelve soldiers and Lieutenant for the good of
the natives and the benefit they receive. I have sent persons there to
remedy the evil, and seeing all I have herein stated that you may order
things as you deem most advantageous and I shall carry out your orders
regardless of the petitions of the Friars, who only base their
objections in not wanting the Spaniards about them, as in their present
condition they are absolute masters of the Indians.

May God preserve your Catholic Majesty.

DIEGO REBOLLEDO.

St. Augustine, Fla., October 18th, 1657.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1657.

Things are in a most disastrous condition in Florida, there will soon be
no government left, if God does not help us. The Casique of Tarihila
refused to send some of his principal Indians to St. Augustine with
heavy loads of corn. I don’t know why the Governor insisted on this
labor, but the Casique gathering together the other Casiques insisted
that their principal Indians should not be made to do this work that
they had vassals to perform their labor. The Governor took the refusal
much to heart, and as a man of so little experience insisted until he
caused them to rise. They said they were not slaves; that to obey God
they had become Christians--they had never been conquered, but had
listened to the word of God the Priest had taught them. So the Casique
of San Martin at the head and all the Casiques who would follow him,
which were the Casiques of Santa Fe, Potano and San Pedro, who marched
from San Francisco and San Mateo with the others, making in all eleven
Casiques, entered and hung the Governor. Think, your Fatherly Majesty,
of such happenings. In a land where such war is carried on, I cannot
tell you of the atrocities perpetuated by these poor Florida Indians.
Nor do you understand how the Island of Jamaica is settled by the
English, who have it well fortified with three strong Forts, and all the
harbors are guarded. All prisoners from there tell us, and all who come
from there tell us that now, in this month of May forty store ships
arrived for them, and it is their intention to take Cuba. This has been
known here and in Havana by mail, which has come. It is very important
to notify you of all this, for soon it will be impossible to travel from
here to Spain nor from there here. By giving this information I feel
that I fulfill my duty, and you can act towards your vassals in a
fatherly manner.

FRAY JUAN GOMEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., April 4th, 1657.




CHAPTER IX.

A. D. 1662-1670.

     _Report of Alonzo Aranqui y Cortez concerning the auditing of the
     accounts and condition of the Royal Treasury--Reports the finding
     of a large hill supposed to be a silver mine--Report of Juan
     Cebadilla to his Majesty--The Governor not to keep the keys of the
     Royal chest--The administration to be adopted with the negroes--Too
     much harshness shown the Royal employees--Francisco Guerra y Vega
     reports a Captain of the Garrison for indecency and offense to his
     superiors, for which same he was reprimanded and imprisoned as a
     warning, then given his liberty--The King to the Captain-General of
     the Provinces of Florida--Instructions as to the continuance of the
     passage to Marcana Guale--Founding the town of Santiago near
     Augustine--The performing of certain duties by soldiers for which
     money shall be paid--Soldiers shall be permitted to raise crops
     which are their principal sustenance--That the Governor shall not
     employ the people of the town in personal work for personal
     aggrandisement--But shall look that he, the Governor, shall look to
     the needs and wants of the people--By order of the King, 1670._


_To His Catholic Royal Majesty_:

Having presented before the tribunal on behalf of the Royal officers of
Guadalapara the sworn bills, and others not sworn to, by which were
adjusted and proven the accounts of your administration which had been
running from the 7th of March, 1663, up to August 15th of the same year,
it was found to result in a liquidated balance in favor of your Royal
Treasury. Information of which was immediately sent to Don Geronimo de
la Luna, judge for your Majesty, that he should have it delivered to the
Treasury. He provided an Auto ordering Don Diego Salazar, Treasurer, to
place it in the Treasury. This person replied to him stating that he had
no money whatsoever from Jacon or Virginia. The infantry I sent out to
investigate tell me that in the Province of Apalache there is a very
large hill, which, in their opinion, is a silver mine, from the
specimens found in the ground and from pieces they picked up on the hill
and brought as samples. Persons who are versed in such matters say that
from their accounts they must be mines.

As these matters do not admit of delay, and much care and caution is
required, I am myself going to investigate the matter thoroughly, and
give you a long and detailed account, being absolutely necessary for the
tranquility of this Province. May God preserve your Majesty for many
years.

ALONZO ARANQUI Y CORTEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., September 8th, 1662.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1666.

_To His Catholic Royal Majesty_:

On the 27th of November of this year we received a document from Your
Royal Highness with six orders containing the form and manner in which
the Royal Treasury must be conducted in its administration and other
things which were herein referred to, and what has passed in the
accomplishment of them. The order in which your Majesty states that the
Governor is not to keep the keys to the Royal Chest, but that your
officer alone must keep them, and that an account must be kept and sent
to this Treasury each year. We notified him and he obeyed, but as to its
accomplishment he desired us to say nothing to him about it, as things
were different here from other places--because all allowances and pay
are collected by his order, and thus he wishes the keys to the chest
where the money is kept. As to the accounts, he will provide them as
should be just, which is the same answer he gave before as shown in the
accompanying letter. The order for the administration that must be
adopted with the negroes was obeyed by the Governor, and all are placed
in compliance with it. We also notified him of the order your Majesty
sent, reproving him for speaking so harshly to your Majesty’s Royal
Employees.

As the order sent by your Majesty regarding the labor of the estates,
all necessary steps have been taken. The one received stating that
hereafter one of your employees should be present at the paying of the
workmen, and the providing of supplies and ammunition for these forts,
was obeyed, and although the Governor also obeyed in the fulfilment of
it, he did not do so to the letter and there has been trouble between us
ever since.

JUAN CEBADILLA.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Your Highness_:

Don Francisco Larra whom your Majesty has had the mercy to send as
Captain of a Company of soldiers to this Garrison of St. Augustine,
Fla., is a person of such daring, restless and bold and has a mind--who
is led astray by the impulses of his will--that with his manner of
acting and talking he has given offense to the better and greater part
of the people of this Garrison, not excepting the Ecclesiastics whom he
offends and speaks in such abusive and indecent a manner of their
character. And so on this account as well as the little respect with
which he treats me, not paying the slightest attention to my office
extrajudicially. I have admonished him in the kindest terms to correct
his ways and fulfill his duties as Captain of the Infantry--not alone
was this effort a vain one, but he took a bold and daring step with me,
in the presence of the Ministers and principal people of the
Garrison--for this incivility and profanation I had him imprisoned in
the Fort, expressing to him my wrath and indignation, a copy of which I
send you. With this as a warning, I then had him set at liberty. I beg
your Highness that seeing this, you will proceed as you think best for
the peace of this Garrison. May God give you the prosperity of a
Christian.

FRANCISCO GUERRA Y VEGA.

St. Augustine, Fla., September 2d, 1666.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE KING.

_To My Captain-General of the Provinces of Florida_:

The principal people of the town of Santiago de Tolomato have written me
a letter on the 21st of March, 1658, that Don Luis Reyes y Borhas,
being Governor of those Provinces, laid the foundation of the town of
Santiago, which is three leagues distant from the Garrison of St.
Augustine with the intention of continuing a passage to Morcana Guale
and surrounding Provinces and although at the founding there were many,
only about thirty remained including Casiques and persons of standing,
to continue the work. They beg that you will send more people, since
they are quick and disposed to work, so that they may complete the
passage as far as San Juan, a distance of twelve leagues, as much for
the relief of the soldiers as other things that may occur. That they
should not be called upon to perform other duties, as they have been by
the Governors who has not recompensed them for their services. Calling
upon them to unload vessels arriving at the Garrison, cut timber from
the forests and other services not in their line of duty, taking them
from their labor when planting corn, which is the principal sustenance
for themselves and families, causing them to lose their crops and suffer
hunger. Having seen in my Council of the Indias what I said to my Judge,
it has seemed right that I should order and command you, as I have done,
that hereafter you do not employ the people of said town in your own
personal work and that you proceed to preserve them and relieve their
wants by every possible means in your power and you will serve me best.

I THE KING.

Madrid, February 26th, 1670.
By order of the King our Lord.

JUAN TUBIZA,
Chairman of the Council.




CHAPTER X.

A. D. 1671-1673.

     _’Tis the judgment of the Court that Pedro Menendez received the
     title of Governor of Florida by right of conquest, Captain-General
     and Commander of the Fleet by appointment of the King, Don Felipe,
     the Second, as well as other positions of trust because of his
     valor and faithful service and that these titles shall be given to
     his legitimate heirs and for which same the Don Gabriel Menendez
     Tarres y Aviles doth petition and it is the judgment of this Court
     that said titles shall be so conferred--Important papers burned in
     Simancas--Manuel De Mendoza gives information commanded by his
     Majesty as to the designs of the English enemy--The discovery of
     the South Sea by the four vessels sailing through the Straights of
     Magellan--Condition of this Garrison and fortification and other
     Provinces implores assistance for completing the work already
     begun--Report of Francisco De La Guerra y Vega to the King
     concerning an Englishman taken prisoner while he was Governor--The
     prisoner was one of a crew who landed in the Province of Guale--The
     Indians killed seven men, imprisoned three and two women--They
     proved to be part of company coming over to settle in St.
     Elena--This man, who was second in authority in the settlement, I
     detained as a prisoner, putting him on soldier’s rations--He was
     turned over to my successor upon the expiration of my term of
     office--An effort was made to break up this settlement upon your
     Majesty’s soil, without success, however._ (1673.)


JUDGMENT OF THE COURT.

The Governor, Don Gabriel Menendez Torres y Aviles, sets forth in the
preceding petition that His Highness the King Don Felipe II (whom God
grant may come to glory) agrees with the Governor Pedro Menendez y
Aviles, Knight of the Order of Santiago, that his uncle, brother of his
grandfather, had agreed about the year 1565, that he, the said Pedro
Menendez, had to discover all the provinces of Florida, settle and build
in them two or three towns, all at his own expense, for which service
your Grace granted him the title of Governor of said Province and lands
of Florida, with all the privileges and prerogatives that are granted
the other Governors of Castile--and that having set sail to accomplish
this, and make these settlements with a private galleon of his own, of
900 tons, and many other ships and vessels which he also carried at his
own expense and having conquered, as he effectively did, the said
Province, and having settled and established two towns in it, which are
today flourishing and supplying this crown, even before completion of
this conquest. Your Majesty has named him Captain-General of the Royal
Fleet which is to be commanded and joined in Santander against the
English, commanding him to assist in this military exploit,
notwithstanding that he is under obligations in the first place, by the
treaty and agreement he had made of discovering all the land of the
Province of Florida within the given term of three years counting from
the day he embarked and set sail in the Bay of the Port of Cadiz with
the fleet he carried for said conquest. Being of the greatest importance
the business for which the Royal Fleet was formed and arranged, and
while he was preparing and getting it ready, the said Governor Menendez
de Aviles died--and by his death the Duke of Medina Sidonia was
immediately named Captain-General. Afterwards having been asked on the
part of the legitimate heirs of the said Governor Pedro Menendez de
Aviles, the accomplishment of all these services which your grant had
offered him, it was contradicted by the Attorney-General of this
Court--taking advantage of one of said agreements which reads: “That if
in the expressed term of three years the Governor Pedro Menendez de
Aviles should not have finished and completed in all the said conquest
according to agreement, neither your Majesty nor any other Kings, your
successors, should be bound to fulfil any of the rewards offered.” For
this reason the heirs brought suit against the Attorney-General which
was continued. For sentence, by revision of the Court it was ordered to
be given to Don Martin Menendez, oldest brother of the petitioner, the
title of perpetual Governor of said Provinces, as had been done with his
uncle, and besides they were to give him forty thousand ducats of
silver.

Withholding the charge of the Indias to augment from the right of
succession which his uncle left established, and a fishery in said
Province which the said Don Martin should select without any
remuneration for the many expenses he incurred in the conquest, Don
Martin Menendez having died without issue, or heir to his estate, the
petitioner asked they expedite the title of Governor upon him, as it was
expedient. Although endeavors have been made in the archives of Simancas
to find these papers, they have not been found, and it is said they were
burned in the fire which occurred in these archives. Imploring your
Majesty’s order that the pre-eminence and prerogative be reserved and
observed as with the title of all the other courts and marquises of
Castile, and also in consideration of the services rendered by the
Governor his uncle, and other Generals of the Indias who were members of
his house. Having seen in the Council of the Indias the petition and
letters patent of nobility, and considering the great services done by
Pedro Menendez de Aviles in the conquest of Florida as well as in other
positions of trust where he has acted with so much valor as to deserve
that his King Felipe the Second should have voluntarily given him the
title of Governor, and that his successors continue to occupy positions
as Generals--his house having spread such glory and honor as to be
noted, it has seemed well that your Majesty should grant the petitioner
the title of Castile, that he may enjoy the honors he so well deserves
as a reward for his many and remarkable services. Your Grace will
command that which is most deserved.

Madrid, November 28th, 1671.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sire_:

By Cedula of January 20th of this year, your Majesty commands me to give
information regarding the designs of the English enemy. Also of the
discovery of the South Sea by the four vessels which sailed through the
Strait of Magellan, from which I had news that they arrived at Baldivia
dismantled. A German Captain was in command. He showed great zeal in
serving you. He gave a long account of the Viceroy of Peru, and what he
intended doing. The Government Places under my charge are the Garrison
of St. Augustine, Harbour and Port of Apalache and the river St.
Catherine, a frontier of St. Elena, where the English enemy are at
present; a few other less important harbours, all of which I desire to
have guarded as by your orders I am obligated.

As regards this Garrison, head of this Province, and the state of the
Fortification which is being built and the designs of the English enemy
and the overtures made by them. This being a frontier of the Province of
Guale where I have stationed some infantry to watch the movements and
intuitions of the enemy, and where they could detain them, while I sent
aid and as strong a reinforcement as possible. It seems the proper thing
for us to have sufficient troops there to impede the approach of the
enemy on this Garrison and place sentinels all along to notify should
they approach by land or sea. As to the Province of Apalache which falls
almost in the bosom of Mexico, I am sure it is a place of no less
importance than this Garrison, rather I should say more so, being
thickly settled and reached by land from all the Provinces far as New
Mexico, and all others still to be discovered far as the Strait of
David, of which the German Captain discourses at such length in his
statement. Besides, it is a fertile land, and much longed for by the
enemy as it is noted for its agriculture, for which cause it should be
well settled and fortified, its Harbour should have a good fort and at
least one hundred infantry who could at any rate give the English enemy
some trouble to occupy it or set foot in said Province. This should be
done to prevent any damage, not alone in the Province, but to vessels
plying the Mexican path. I implore you to look into the matter with the
care and attention the case requires. So far as I am concerned, I have
made every effort in my power to secure and protect it. I shall try to
push this building through rapidly, that I may go and reconnoitre that
Province, carrying with me the military engineer, Ygnacio Daza, who
resides in this Garrison, that he may point out what is needed at
present. I implore your Majesty most earnestly to look with pious pity
upon your Royal Provinces and send all the assistance you can to
complete this building and the other works of which this Garrison stands
in such need, lacking all the means of protection by which we can serve
your gracious Majesty.

May God spare you for many years.

MANUEL DE MENDOZA.

St. Augustine, Fla., Dec. 15th, 1672.

       *       *       *       *       *

1673.

_Your Majesty_:

In a letter of Yours of the present month and year, you tell me that
seeing in the Council a letter which was received, written in English,
it was agreed that I should inform you of what had happened to an
Englishman, said to be prisoner in St. Augustine, Fla., where I was
Governor. The cause and pretext for making him a prisoner. Complying
with what your Majesty asks, I inform you in the following manner:

About the end of May of last year there arrived in one of the ports of
the Province of Guale, which belongs to the Christian Indians, an
English vessel. Some of the crew having landed in a launch, the Indians
of that Province killed seven men, imprisoned three men and two women,
then the vessel with all speed turned and went off, not giving time that
from St. Augustine, where I was Governor, we should send help to those
Ports to aid in imprisoning them. Bringing me these prisoners I ordered
that their declaration be taken, at which I was present. They declared
that they had come over with vessels to settle in the Port of St. Elena,
distant from the Garrison of St. Augustine forty or fifty leagues north.
In the month of June of last year there came to the Garrison a soldier
with the news that the vessels had returned and entered the same Port,
reinforced and with the flag of truce, the captain and four other men
had landed and that speaking to a Lieutenant in command of the infantry
on guard, they told him how they were establishing a settlement near St.
Elena, with two hundred men, and that they came in search of the
prisoner, delivering at the same time to the Lieutenant two letters from
the Governor of that settlement, written in Latin, in which he asks that
the prisoner be delivered, if not, they declared themselves enemies.

With this news I called a general meeting of the Royal Officers and
Commanders of the war, from which resulted that all agreed it was the
better way to serve God and your Majesty, and secure the quietude of
those Provinces, to break up said settlement, and that we should go to
work before they fortified themselves and take possession of more land.
For this purpose they prepared themselves and equipped three vessels at
that time in Port. The Chief in command being appointed by the Board,
assigning him a number of warriors to obtain the object for which they
went. A storm overtook the vessels and they could not get there in time
and so arrived without accomplishing anything. Of the referred to
notice, on two or three occasions, it was presented to your Majesty and
to the Marquez of Macera, Viceroy of New Spain, always stating what was
best to the service of God and your Majesty. To make every effort to
dislodge the said settlement, it belonging to the Christian Indians, and
they being new to our doctrine, might be easily influenced by the
heresies of the English. And although not new to our Holy Faith, we
might have the same doubts as they are a variable and roving people. It
was advisable for your Majesty’s service that we should dislodge them at
that time, that they might not possess themselves of that Province and
the interior land, and make themselves owners. It would not be well to
have a settlement of a strange Nation on your Majesty’s territory
without your orders. From this information I awaited a reply to follow
out the Orders from your Majesty and the Viceroy, and that together you
would aid me, and with some help, as that Post lacks people, I detained
the prisoner, not ill-treating him, in the house of one of his
countrymen, allowing him military rations, which is what the soldiers in
service have. As I was advised that the prisoner was the second person
in authority in that settlement, I placed him under better security,
that he might not escape and inform them of the lack of forces in the
Garrison, for without doubt knowing it the settlement would come and
take possession at very little cost. Just at this time my term of
Governor came to an end, without having determined upon a method to work
in this affair, I turned all over to the Governor, my predecessor, that
he might act as ordered in the reply to my information. This is all that
I can tell you regarding the English prisoner. By this the Council will
know that I always worked with Christian zeal, trying to stop anything
opposed to the increase of our Holy Catholic faith. God preserve you
many years.

FRANCISCO DE LA GUERRA Y VEGA.

Madrid, July 12th, 1673.




CHAPTER XI.

A. D. 1675.

     _Letters to the King from the Governor, Pablo Ita Salazer--The oath
     administered in the tower of the old Fort, which is tumbling
     down--The Garrison in want of supplies and ammunition--No
     warehouses--Exposed to the fatalities of the weather--The Fort in
     danger from pirates--Necessary to use Spanish daggers for the land
     side protection--More money badly needed to finish the
     works--Importance of the Castle to the Garrison--A pentagonal form
     recommended--A hundred men needed to guard the Castle--The Viceroy
     of Spain did not send the ten thousand dollars--Fort in danger from
     pirates--Two hundred leagues from Havana and five hundred from New
     Spain._


A. D. 1675.

_Sire_:

I have repeatedly given you an account of the manner in which I assumed
control of this Government, taking the oath of fidelity in the tower of
the Old Castle, which is almost in ruins, the artillery dismounted and
scattered as if on a beaten field of battle. The blind obedience my duty
demands in any employment of your Majesty, forces me to again repeat the
condition of things. The old wooden Fort is in ruins, the stone one
incomplete and with no defense whatever. No income or means to finish
it. In the commissary department only one hundred “arrobas” of corn, and
no other produce of any description. The Garrison is in the greatest
want, as no vessels with supplies have yet arrived from New Spain.
Seeing that we could not hold out three weeks longer, I seized two small
vessels carrying about two thousand arrobas of corn. As the Fort was in
such a demolished condition, with no defense and exposed to losing what
was done, I detained these vessels, intending to give them some amount
of embargo, conceding to each his share, but having communicated it to
the Royal Officers, they thought it too severe treatment and that I
should pay freight and the conquered’s pay; that it would be better to
pursue such a course. I let the matter stand for the present, retained
the crew and the vessels I sent to bring peons to continue the building
of the Castle, which is so absolutely important. This was done with the
greatest care and promptness, as demonstrated on the maps I submit to
you. Being entirely without means for carrying on this work, I implore
you will send it. The Fort has neither walls nor moat, some of the
ramparts only half finished, no means of closing it to make it secure.
It would seem that they have been careless in the guarding of the Fort,
sending only twenty-five men each day to do duty when it should have at
least one hundred men constantly on the watch. I repaired things as well
as I could for the lodging of the men and guards that they might stay
in, as is done in Flanders and Milan and other places, but the Officers
refuse to occupy them, stating they are in no condition nor have they
sufficient conveniences for them to go in. As it will be profitable and
advantageous to you, I implore you again not only to send the money but
the order compelling them to enter at least one hundred to guard the
Castle. May God guide thee in what is right.

PABLO ITA SALAZAR.

St. Augustine, Fla., Aug. 23rd, 1675.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Your Highness_:

Not to fail in my duty, knowing as I do from twenty-two years’ service
in your Majesty’s States of Flanders and other ports, the importance of
fulfilling. It has seemed necessary for me to give you a full and
detailed account of the fortification being built in this Garrison by
your Royal Order. I have already informed you of the condition I found
it in, on assuming control of this Government of Florida. Considering it
one of your defenses and territory under whose banner it was conquered,
I have taken the greatest pains to investigate matters thoroughly. At
first I could not give as true a statement as I should have wished,
seeing so many faults and errors; but the untiring efforts I have made
to ascertain facts have brought to light certificates of the enormous
cost of this building. Being a place for the defense of the Bar, or
entrance to the Harbor, I find that by making this fortification in a
pentagonal form the bulwarks will point directly towards the Bar serving
to defend from and towards an attack, and by building a battery it
covers us in a measure from the enemy. Wishing to discuss this matter I
called a meeting of the Royal Officers showing them the great saving of
cost to the Royal Exchequer; but they seem opposed to the plan and,
having no orders from your Highness, I am obliged to leave the work as
it is. My greatest desire is to finish it and have the opportunity of
defending

[Illustration: Remains of the St. Augustine City Gateway.]

it with my life. As on other occasions in other places, I have exposed
that life. God grant you a long life.

PABLO ITA Y SALAZAR.

St. Augustine, Fla., Nov. 23rd, 1675.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sire_:

Having done me the honor to appoint me Mayor of the new city of Vera
Cruz and port of San Juan de Ulloa, you still further honored me by
appointing me Governor of Florida.

I immediately began an investigation of the state of the Old Castle and
the new stone one being made by your order. In the first place I found
it had the shape which will be clear to you in the report and letter of
the same date as this. Secondly, they continued with many difficulties
the building of the new one, as the Viceroy of New Spain has not
assisted with the ten thousand dollars a year to which this Garrison is
entitled by provision of your Majesty, and as you have no money or other
effects in your Royal Chests to supply the wants, I have made it known
to the Archbishop and Viceroy of New Spain by report and petition,
showing them how urgent it was to send us a certain sum for the
continuance of the building. I also notified the Judge of the Royal
Audience of Mexico, as is evident through all that I place before you
also what I have forwarded to the general finance office, who refused to
send any sum whatever until I had from this Garrison given a report of
the state of the building of the Castle, and the distribution made of
the salary assigned since I took possession of this Government. I found
the Port in a most dilapidated condition with no defense. I took the
oath of fidelity as you ordered, and not to be wanting in my duty as a
faithful vassal, as by being this, I have merited the great honors you
have bestowed upon me in the field. Having taken the oath I received
different Royal Cedules, among them one in which you command the Viceroy
to send ten thousand dollars more for the building, and that the
citizens and soldiers aid as far as they are able, as is done in other
places, as the benefits redound to their good and security. I must tell
you that they do, coming in person to assist in the building, with the
accustomed punctuality which is all they can do, because this Garrison
is composed of a few married soldiers who are extremely poor, their
income not exceeding the salaries earned each year. This being a land of
no commerce nor communication by entrances or departures of vessels,
there being no produce or other necessaries with which to accumulate an
income. And although you pay their salaries they never receive it in
full, as they must first assist in the buying of accoutrements for the
three vessels that bring the supplies. From their salaries they have
also paid for the repairs of the Old Castle and the furtherance of the
new building, warehouses, Royal Houses and all other necessary things
which present themselves in a post, as you have not assigned to this
Garrison any means for similar expenses, nor is there anything in the
Royal Chests. There are no rents of any kind to supply them and it is in
charge only of Royal Officers. The poor allowance divided among the
infantry and the state of the Castle will be evident to you from the
reports sent you, and I assure you that having served you for a period
of forty-two years in the armies of Germany, Flanders and Badajos, in
none of them have I been so well pleased as in this one, for the many
difficulties and dangers. The lack of means for completing the
fortification, the invasions and the lack of forces in which I find
myself, as you will see by the lists I forward you of the subjects who
are disabled and old and enjoy the privileges of false muster through
your kindness. The soldiers and sailors, who at present run on these
vessels and are absent most of the time, and those who are on guard as
sentinels. So, when the boats are obliged to go out for supplies I am
left with about eighty men who can serve. Besides this, we have no
ammunition nor supplies, so much so that when I arrived the want was so
great that families were obliged to go in the woods and hunt for roots
to keep themselves from starvation. So exposed and in need were they
that had a vessel landed and offered them food they would have miserably
surrendered. And we are always thus exposed to this fatality, because we
have no warehouses of food supplies as in every other port such as San
Juan de Ulloa, Acapulco and Morro of Havana, in these parts. My
experience in Flanders, Castillo de Amberes, Gante y Cambria, they have
supply stores of vegetables, biscuit, cheese and hung beef, enough to
last at least one year. I have sent them supplies for a long time, for
in cases of accident, and here on account of the distance and slowness
of communication there should be more care. Havana, the nearest point,
is two hundred leagues, and New Spain is five hundred, so you see the
vessels have to sail a long way exposed to the fatalities of storm,
weather and pirates, which can at any time overtake them. I have
thought proper to place all these statements before you, as being so
important to your Royal Service you may consider them. And I beg you
will aid in this building of the Fort, by sending the required means for
its continuance. It would be a very great affliction for these Provinces
to leave it in its present state. While I have seen many castles of
importance and great renown, none surpass this one, nor have been built
at so small a cost in the Indies, as will be demonstrated to you in the
accompanying certificates given by the Royal Officer. It seems that the
peons earn only one real a day and three pounds of corn, making the
twenty-five pounds come to eight reals, which is the correct price.
Their living in other places would be at least four reals. Two of the
Captains who assist in the building and hewing of stone, earn only six
reals a day, where in other places they would make at least three and
four dollars per day. All the material and other things needed are in
other places placed convenient for the workmen, so that had it been
built elsewhere than in this Garrison it would have cost more than
eighty thousand dollars. I find it very damaging for this Garrison to be
without any fortification. We are obliged to tear down the old Castle
just next to it, and the new one is not yet closed in, so that we fear
the enemy who with a much larger force could easily capture us. They are
only distant fifty leagues, two days’ sailing, and once that they were
owners of this Port, they would be of the entire Province destroying all
the conversions of the Indians who to the service of God are supported
and protected by the King and a great trouble to your vassals who sail
back and forth in the commerce with this America. Being owners, they
would have all the ports, and with their pirates stationed everywhere
that vessels should pass. I feel the Port a little more secure than when
I came, for one of the bastions is about completed, and by closing the
other side looking landward with a palisade of Spanish daggers and tuna,
I can retire if it should become necessary. In the meantime your Majesty
will kindly apply the means sufficient to finish the work as speedily as
possible, as the petition states the danger and risk this Garrison is
in. May God spare you many years of the work of Christianity.

PABLO ITA Y SALAZAR.

St. Augustine, Fla., June 15th, 1675.




CHAPTER XII.

A. D. 1675.

     _An effort to be made to dislodge the English from Santa
     Elena--Orders to complete the Castle--Appalache considered the best
     Province for settlement--Families from Yucatan for settlers, also
     the Carrabies--Supplies sent from New Spain--Barracks to be made in
     the Fort for the soldiers--Money sent to finish the new Castle,
     also supplies for the soldiers--The neighbors to assist in building
     the new Castle--Repairs on the bulwarks at Guale--Increase of
     troops ordered for St. Augustine--A Fortress ordered built at
     Appalache for the defense of that Province._


By dispatch of the same month and year notice was given Governor Pablo
Ita Salazar of the commands issued to his predecessor and to the Viceroy
of New Spain regarding the dislodging of the English from the Port of
St. Elena, of which they had taken possession with the intention of
settling near the mouth, which in effect they did, occupying a passage
called St. George. For this reason notice was sent the Sergeant-Major
Nicolas Ponce de Leon to proceed to dislodge the English from this
settlement, gathering all the forces of that Province and asking aid of
the Viceroy of New Spain who was ordered to reinforce him with what he
needed. He did not think there would be any considerable difficulty in
accomplishing this, as from four English fugitives he had learned all
they had done.

By another dispatch the Governor of Florida was told that the Viceroy of
New Spain had notified them of having aided that Garrison with all the
supplies needed. As to the hundred families he asked for, that should go
as laborers for the increase and culture of crops, they would look into
the matter and attend to his representation of it when the case came up,
and he was specially charged to be very careful and watchful in
completing the Castle and defense of that Garrison.

By Cedula of 1673 the Governor of Yucatan was asked to send to Florida
twenty-four families of Indians--master weavers--for the increase of
those Provinces for which purpose he would place himself in
correspondence with the Governor of the Islands, that both might work
out the best means of accomplishing it.

The Governor of Florida replied that the best and most desirable
Provinces for the Spanish nation to settle would be Appalache and others
very near it. It was exceedingly fertile, and if the settlers were
laborers the crops would be very abundant. They gather wheat as
abundantly as corn which is the general sustenance. It would be easy to
grow the fruits, the land being level and easy to reach on account of
the many navigable rivers--to cultivate the lands in cotton, grain and
indigo, which grows wild in those Provinces and the crops lost for the
want of some one to cultivate them--and it would pay beautifully. This
could be increased by putting the twenty-four Yucatan families in for a
limited time. Having seen all this in the Council, they again commanded
the Governor of Yucatan to place himself in communication with the
Governor of Florida and try to send these families, since such great
gain would result from it, to those who go as native Indians of Florida
to whose Governor he ordered, if this was carried into effect to supply
them with the necessaries as per order of Cedula of 1673.

By dispatch of this same year the Governor of the Canaries was ordered
and informed of the statement made by the Government of Florida
regarding the hundred families going over to settle, telling him the
means which could be used, and that it be carried and quickly and
effectively that they might have the chance of obtaining the settlements
of these Provinces. The Council of War having seen what Governor Pablo
Ita Salazar had to say of the lack of food from which the Province was
suffering, and the lack of means for obtaining it, commanded the Viceroy
of New Spain to send that Garrison the necessary supplies for six months
in advance, both ammunition and food, on account of the condition of the
Garrison, so that it could be prepared for any emergency which might
arise, and not be without defense, and to give an account of its
execution. It was also commanded the Viceroy to send the necessary money
to Florida that they might make Barracks and lodgings in the Fort for
the soldiers who entered as guards, that they might be comfortable under
cover and suffer less hardships. He was advised that all should be done
with as little expense as possible, and to communicate with the Governor
to whom the same order had been given. He said Don Pablo Ita Salazar
made a report of the state in which he found the building of the new
Castle in Florida, and the lack of means with which to continue it. The
Council of War having seen this report notified the Viceroy to send the
supplies of three hundred troops, the quota of that Garrison, and three
thousand dollars to be expended in the delayed fortification of said
Castle; approved by the Governor, it should continue the work of the
Castle, and he was recommended to try and reduce the expenses to the
absolute necessary. That the neighbors might help in the building, as
they were interested, and it was for their own convenience and defense
that they could assist without loss of time, and with the supply of
three hundred troops who would remain in the Castle. That the number of
soldiers there was so reduced it would not only pay the people well but
there would be a surplus of capital to provide all that was needed. That
this complement of infantry should be kept in the Garrison, and his
Majesty had resolved to send a hundred more soldiers by the first
opportunity. He again commanded the Viceroy to punctually supply the
wants, so that no cause can stop the building of the Castle.

In a letter of August 24th, 1675, the Governor, Don Pablo Ita Salazar,
reported to have decided upon making a roof or covering for the bulwarks
at Guale, to put the powder and other ammunitions used in the Garrison,
and a Barracks and guard house, because what they had was of wood and
exposed to incendiaries. That the Royal Officers were so opposed he
desisted in its execution to avoid unpleasant encounters until it should
be known in the Council, and together with the reports of the Officers.
He ordered the continuance of the Castle for better security and defense
at the least cost to the Royal Treasury.


FORTIFICATION OF APPALACHE.

Don Manuel Cendiga, being Governor of Florida, reported among other
things the need of infantry in that Garrison--of what they had, much was
in the Province of Appalache which belongs to that jurisdiction. For
this reason his Majesty resolved to increase the troops of the Garrison
of St. Augustine. He commanded the forty-three missionaries and the
Viceroy of New Spain to order the Royal Officers of Mexico to increase
the supply of troops in Florida, so that the quota remain at three
hundred and fifty, besides the missionary fathers who must punctually
supply them each year and solicit their complement.

Don Pablo Ita Salazar, Governor of Florida, gave a report of the
numerous infidel Indian settlements there were in the Province of
Appalache, and that in the Province of Guale the English had a
settlement at St. George. That with the vexations, killing and thefts,
with the vicinity of one and the other the Christian Indians receive, we
find the only remedy to be in erecting a fortification in the Province
of Appalache and place in it one hundred soldiers, and a body of one
hundred families around them. Then we might promise to keep them in
obedience and subjection to this throne. The Council having seen this,
ordered that at present they should prepare to make a fortress in the
Port of Appalache in the best and easiest manner for the defense of that
Port, and report by the first opportunity the time and amount required
for building it. By still another dispatch he ordered the Governor to
send a perfectly clear report of what he had already done regarding the
fortress of the Port, and of all the Province; the spot best adapted for
it, the form and disposition, forces needed for the defense, and if
there would be any difficulty in opening up the entrance of the Bay,
where it was built; the depth of the water, if vessels could enter, and
of what tonnage; have a very careful and minute report from some one of
experience and a master. Send a map and report attached of what this
work will cost, giving your opinion so that seeing it and the
information asked on the matter the most advantageous resolutions may be
taken for the security and defense of that Province.




CHAPTER XIII.

A. D. 1680-1685.

     _Letter from Pablo Ita Salazer to his Majesty--Indians of the
     Province of Guale ally themselves with the English and together
     with over three hundred men make war against the Spaniards of the
     Island of St. Catherine--Surprising and killing the sentinels, only
     one of whom escaped to warn the Garrison--The people gather in the
     convent of a Friar and defend themselves from daylight until four
     o’clock, when aid from this Garrison reached them--The enemy
     retires--Natives of the Island greatly alarmed--Disquieting news of
     the intentions of the enemy upon this Garrison--Implores the aid of
     the King quickly that the English may be ejected from the land--Don
     Juan Marquez Cabrera, Governor and Captain-General of Florida,
     gives an account to his Majesty of hostilities in the
     Provinces--Two Fleets, French and English, going and coming from
     Havana--Seize Fort Matanzas and after plundering, burn it to the
     ground--Is being rebuilt--Great depredations committed up and down
     the coast by the enemy--Indians and half-breeds taken and sold into
     slavery--Pushing the work on the Castle--Grieved over its slow
     progress, owing to lack of workmen--Begs to be allowed to retire
     because of age and long service--To Charles II, our principal
     Casique, the King--From the people of the territory of
     Habalache--The King to the Governor and Captain-General of Florida
     concerning ten negroes from St. George who asked for the waters of
     baptism--A Sergeant-Major from St. George comes to claim
     them--Because they have become Christians the Spanish King decides
     to buy them--After receiving a receipt they are to be set at
     liberty, each one given a document to that effect--The King
     reprimands Don Diego Quirago for not immediately attending to these
     matters--Orders a full account to be sent as soon as it is
     accomplished._


A. D. 1680.

_Sire_:

In a letter of April last year I stated to you the misgivings I felt
about the English who have populated the Province of Carolina and River
St. George. In November of the following year I repeated this with some
evidence, and such a plan or a map from the River St. George to Mobile.
Afterwards I was notified that five Englishmen had put to flight one of
the Towns and penetrated as far as the Province of Guale, which belongs
to the jurisdiction of this Garrison, where they came to take
declarations and give information concerning the coming of the English
to those parts; all of which I submit to your Majesty.

My duty today is to give an account of what happened in the Province of
Guale this year. The Chuchumacos, Bechizes and Chulucas who were at war
among themselves, but had maintained friendly relations and trading with
this Province, became friendly with the English and have declared
themselves our enemies. They made an invasion first on the Island of
Guadalquiri in Guale, then on the main land they killed and scalped a
number of the Natives until these latter rallied and, with one of our
Lieutenants at the head, sallied forth and repulsed them. A few days
later they made an entrance on the Island of St. Catherine, one of the
frontiers, with a force of over three hundred men. They killed the
Sentinels who were six in number, one only escaping, who gave the alarm
and the citizens were able to defend themselves. There were forty-five
Spaniards from this Garrison and about a hundred Natives. They took
refuge in the Convent of the Friar, who teaches the Gospel in that
Province, Captain Francisco Suentes, whom I sent two years ago to take
charge of that place, who defended himself and army with great valor and
distinction from daylight until four o’clock in the afternoon against
these Indians, who were armed with firearms. Instantly upon receiving
information of the danger I sent aid to the number of thirty soldiers on
foot and a vessel with eighteen marines. When they arrived the enemy had
retired. I am assured that among them were several Englishmen who
instructed them in the use of the firearms, which consisted of long
guns. This caused great consternation and horror among the natives who
at first evacuated the Island of St. Catherine, but am informed have
since returned doubling their forces. I had sent eight men to them from
this Garrison and I am resolved to send twenty--it being a place of the
utmost importance to this Garrison, as a protection against invasions
and also to obtain food and supplies. The entrance to the Bar of Zapola
is easy and distant from it, as you can see on the map, only two
leagues. Information has been brought me by a pilot, who left here and
was taken prisoner by the French, that he overheard them say they would
come to this Province, possess themselves of the Island and Bar of
Zapala. This is damaging news, and my greatest trouble is lack of
troops, for altogether I have only some two hundred and ninety. I have
increased this with a few natives of seemingly good disposition, should
a fight occur in this Fort, but so inexperienced that they could not
support us. This Post is mainly composed of mariners, pilots,
shipmasters and mates, twelve artillerymen, six widows and a few
children to whom, through your mercy, you grant pay, and ten or twelve
decrepit old men who by age are exempt from toil. I have twenty-four men
in Apalache, distant eighty leagues, and two in Timuqua, two in the pass
of Salamatoto, ten leagues distant from this Garrison. The sentinels of
Matanzas and the Bar. All this causes me great distress as I should be
obliged to repair to the field and I have no resources possible with so
few people. Notwithstanding, I propose, with the help of God, to improve
it, and thus will the conversions advance and secure the road to Mexico.
It is expedient to run the English out of that land, and there are not
two hundred firearms in the armory nor among the soldiers and natives.
If the thirty lancers and hundred infantry I sent for three years ago
had come, things would be in a different shape. With a hundred families
to protect, a good deal of aid is needed as speedily as possible and
your Majesty will send them promptly as to the interest of your service.
God protect you.

PABLO ITA SALAZAR.

St. Augustine, Fla., May 14th, 1680.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1682.

_Sire_:

Don Juan Marquez Cabrera, your Governor and Captain-General of the
Provinces of Florida, gives you an account of how since last February of
this year they have experienced many hostilities in these Provinces from
two French and English fleets who, since they discovered and settled
with ten vessels they brought on these coasts towards the south, have
taken and settled all the entrances and Ports, having seized seven
vessels that were coming and going to the City of Havana, entered and
plundered the Fort of Matanzas with no resistance from those within, and
on another occasion in the same place, where there were forty-five
Spaniards, captains, lieutenants and soldiers, there came four hundred
Indians with firearms and arrows to one of the trenches at the edge of
the two rivers at the foot of the Fort and this time they did not
discharge a single shot, but set fire to the Fort and burned it, being
of wood. I am again rebuilding it in the shape of a bonnet or cap with
its inclinations bias, which it did not have before, with twenty-five
stone houses, so that twelve or sixteen soldiers can defend it. On
retiring they entered the River of Point Martin in Laungara, eighteen
leagues inland and forty from this Garrison; thirty-five Frenchmen
entered and plundered the estate Lachua, imprisoning the owner and some
of his slaves and other persons and their servants. They were assisted
in this by three of the neighbor Casiques, with sixteen Indians. As they
retired they were met by an ambush who liberated the owners of the
estate with the loss of one Indian. Although there were five Spaniards,
with the degree of Captain who enjoy the rank and pay, excused
themselves on the occasion because they feared if they had any one to
encourage them the enemy would not have left one. As soon as I received
the news, although I am very scarce of people for the defense of the
Castle, I made every effort possible to send the Sergeant-Major of this
Post with forty soldiers as quickly as possible. Finding the enemy
already embarked, I ordered him to obstruct the river, seeing the danger
to this Province, not having had any orders from you to keep it open.
Notwithstanding all the Sergeant-Major’s efforts to place obstructions,
I fear the enemy will invade this Garrison if only to see the Fort that
is being built. It is to be in the shape I have shown you on the map,
and plan I have given the Adjutant Alonzo Solano, superintendent of the
work, a man of much intelligence and quite capable of carrying it on. At
the time the French were destroying the estate Lachua the English landed
at the bar of Mosquito Inlet; they killed ten Indians and captured
eighteen. They had also captured the frigate that left this Post for New
Spain; they captured it with a pirate vessel which had come from
Jamaica, as testified to by the “Autos” I sent, in which I also stated
the other hostilities and depredations as you can see in the Office of
the Royal Council. It is a source of grief to me to see the manner in
which they take these poor Indians and sell them into slavery, as they
have done with many, selling them on the Island of Barbado. They even
take the mixed ones, children of Spaniards and Indians. Although I am
quite advanced on the building and defense of the Castle, I feel
disconsolate when I think of the scarcity of troops and the inferior
quality of those I have who are cowardly and pusillanimous as I have
before represented them to you. I repeat it, in hopes that you will send
me at least two good Captains and a hundred first class men. Besides
being dastardly those I have, many of them are too old to be of service,
having been retired and pensioned off. I am heartily sick of those who
have been pensioned off, and of the children who have been pushed into
service with no other object than to receive the pay. While mindful of
the humane interests, this at times is exceedingly trying to my
patience. And so, since the Fort is assuming such shape, I implore you
to give the order needed of sending more men. I also implore your
Majesty that having served you so many years without complaint against
me, that you will replace me in this Garrison and give me permission to
retire.

God grant you a long and prosperous life.

JUAN MARQUEZ CABRERA.

St. Augustine, Fla., July 16th, 1682.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLES II, OUR PRINCIPAL CASIQUE, TO THE KING.

God, who with His power has created us from nothing, it being His
will--we live, although with work and misfortune, it matters not how, so
we live, with our limited understanding, every day without ceasing as we
are commanded by our Creator, since He so wishes it, we praise and
reverence Him. Leaving this apart we also, the nobility and all in
general, old men and old women, children, orphans and disabled, as many
as are found in this territory called Habalache, every day we say it
seems to us, we do not reverence, embrace and receive in our hearts our
principal Casique and King and his noble words. Saying this among
ourselves it seems to make us more humble and disposed to receive your
words when it reaches our ears. As at present, we could long since have
written you, for the obedience we show you, and not waited for your many
noble works, and to make known to you of what we are here seeing and
suffering, being not only ourselves, but all in this world, who were
created from nothing by the will of God. Our priests whose duty it is to
care for our souls, cleanse them and absolve them, teaches us good
things, and takes away and quenches in us ugly and evil things helping
us on to be good Christians, as it is for this you have shown us such
great mercy, and so we recognize it, and are believing with one heart.
Second: Although we are ignorant people, we think that our hearts and
souls belong to our Creator--our bodies and their government, and to
whom they belong to teach and punish is to our Head, whom thou art, and
whom we recognize as our chief Casique and King, and as the grass grows
and has roots, bathed by the dews of night, so we and all your miserable
vassals are nourished by your noble words, and although bodily we do not
see you with our eyes, we take it from the one who represents you as
your Governor and Captain-General--and to him we look as to you and as
your words coming from him who we see, hear and understand, and guard,
believing and obeying him--

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sire_:

From information that I was able to gather by means of gifts to the
native Indians, I succeeded in finding out the designs of the settlers
of St. George and of the new settlement in St. Elena, where this
Garrison was first--distant from here some sixty leagues. About 50
Indians, with orders from the Governor of St. Elena, were to enter the
Province of Tamaqua, do all the damage and hostilities they could,
taking prisoners and killing the natives. I immediately sent a dispatch
by carrier to the Lieutenant of that Province to be on guard and care
for the towns. It seems that some six hours before he received my
notice, they had entered and destroyed the town of Afinca, a place of
about sixty natives. About fifty men entered with sixteen guns and the
balance with bows and arrows and machetes, everything exactly as I had
been informed. They belong to the Yamares nation who have retired from
this dominion and gone over to the English. They killed and carried off
the prisoners as certified by a letter from the Lieutenant. I have
restored as far as possible the Garrison of Tamaqua for the peace of its
natives. If I had had the force sufficient I would have sent the vessels
that I have to the settlement of Santa Elena and done them some damage,
but, as it is, I have not sufficient forces for anything. The two
Captains experienced in that part of the country are old, one of 70 and
the other 60 years old. I am sorry to say, the enemy are settling in the
interior, where they find the lands so rich and productive of all kinds
of fruit. Should they come here they could easily capture us for the
lack of men--we need men--more troops. I am informed that forty days
ago, eleven vessels with seven hundred men, had been sent out from
England. I am awaiting them with fear, for lack of men and ammunition we
have. I also distrust my sentinels. I hope you will immediately send me
re-enforcements.

God preserve you, etc.

JUAN MARQUEZ CABRERA.

St. Augustine, April 15th, 1685.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE KING.


 _To my Governor and Captain-General of the City of St. Augustine in
 the Province of Florida, and Field Marshal Don Diego de Quiraga y
 Lasada, in whose charge that Government is now_:

The Royal officers of that City have given me an account in different
letters of their having arrived at that Garrison ten remaining negroes,
eight males and two females, from St. George. That they asked for the
waters of baptism, it was given them, after which a Sergeant-Major from
St. George came to claim them. Not appearing to be the proper thing to
return them after becoming Christians, it was agreed upon with the
Sergeant-Major to buy them with the money from my Royal exchequer for
the sum of sixteen hundred dollars, granting a writing to that purpose,
to pay said sum at a stated time specified. To satisfy this I sent to
the new city of Vera Cruz for this sum of money which was brought and
deposited in my Royal coffers of that city, advising the Governor of St.
Augustine and notifying the Governor of St. George to send for it. It
seems they came for it at the time the Governor was distributing aid to
the soldiers. He had notified me of the receipt of this money, but not
receiving a reply, he supposed I was not satisfied with the transaction,
imploring I should tell him what to do with the negroes. The men had
been put to work on the Fort, and the women the Governor had retained as
servants in his household. He paid the cost of them, and he only awaited
my orders. In view of all that he asks, through the judge of my Council
of the Indias, it occurs to me to say to you that Don Diego Quiraga was
wanting in his duty by not sending to pay the money deposited in the
Royal coffers for the purchase of said negroes and in the word he had
given the English. He should have considered that in refusing to deliver
them to the English, it was done to protect the religion; this alone
would have sufficed, being as I am such a Catholic. For any excess
expended in their purchase, notwithstanding my failure in replying to
him on this point, and so, it appears strange what this Governor has
done. And so, that you perfectly understand what I order you, as I do
order you, that of the first money which comes into my Royal coffers of
that City you immediately pay up the whole amount, and give the Governor
of St. George perfect satisfaction for the 1,600 dollars agreed upon for
the sale. The defraying of this to be done as quickly as possible. And
as a reward for having come to these provinces to live under the laws of
the Gospel and become Catholics, I order that immediately upon receipt
of this, you give them all their liberty in my name, giving each one,
males and females, a document to that effect, so that seeing their
example others may do likewise. As soon as you have accomplished this
you are to send me a full account, as this is my will.

I, the King, sent by the King our Lord,

DON JUAN DE LA VEA,
_Chairman of the Council_.





CHAPTER XIV.

A. D. 1689-1698.

     _Letter of the Governor and Captain-General of Florida, Don Diego
     Quiroba y Losada, to his Majesty--Giving an account of a custom
     obtaining in the Garrison which he deems dangerous to its
     safety--That is, the ringing of the church bells at midnight, when
     the Host is taken out to administer communion to the dying until
     the same is returned, oftentimes lasting hours, which same drowns
     the fire of the sentinel across the river, who is to fire as many
     times as there are vessels sighted--This danger has been fully laid
     before the Priest, but to no purpose, notwithstanding the city has
     been in arms for some days awaiting the enemy--There is also
     testimony accompanying this letter of the same purport--His Majesty
     by a Cedule of July 18th, 1694, asks for a statement of the order
     pursued in the functions of the Edicts of Faith and Anathema and
     the places where they conduct the Holy Tribunal of the
     Inquisition--These questions answered by Severino Mausaneda, March
     17th, 1690--In 1691 Governor and Captain-General of Florida, Don
     Diego Guiroga y Lorada, gives an account of a military review of
     St. Augustine--Of the great advantage and security to the city of
     building a sea wall extending from the Fort the entire length of
     the town, thus securing it against the sea which in storms comes up
     to the houses--The soldiers and citizens subscribe ten thousand
     dollars and his Highness is implored to designate a sum to help to
     build this wall that the people will be convinced of his Highness’
     interest--The King, A. D. 1698, to the Governor and
     Captain-General, Don Diego Guiroga y Losada, of the City of St.
     Augustine, in which he rebukes the said Governor for unjustly
     taxing the Indians, whom he wishes civilized, and not treated alone
     as vassals, but as his children, attending to their comfort and
     want, and imposes a fine if the money sent to be spent for canvas
     and provisions be not paid to these Indians as per
     agreement--Extracts from the investigations of the Council, in
     regard to alleged excesses committed by the Governor of Florida,
     Don Francisco Moral Sanchez--Besides the scandalous reports
     certified to, is his ill treatment of a Captain of Grenadiers
     acting according to his own will instead of by military law--The
     Royal Officers protest--Certify to the truth of these
     investigations, and implore justice from the King--A report
     according to his Excellency’s desire concerning affairs under
     Governor Don Francisco Marales Sanchez--The investigation shows
     that the facts set forth in the different papers and petitions sent
     to his Majesty to have been only too true--Impossible to put upon
     paper the strange, divers and extraordinary excesses committed by
     this Governor._


A. D. 1689.

_Sire_:

Today I must give you an account of a custom I have found here, which
might redound to the injury of this Garrison. It is that at any hour of
the night when the Host is taken out to administer communion to the
dying the church bells are rung and continue to ring until its return to
the church, with the same solemnity as is done in the day time. Now,
this might cause very serious results, as when we have the sentinel who
is on duty across the river, to fire as many times as there are vessels
in view, then the bells are rung and the people gather together. This
makes us very attentive in listening for the firing and the noise of the
bells at all hours prevents us from hearing and would give the enemy an
opportunity of entering and capturing the Town. I always keep the Fort
well guarded and am prepared, but as we know from so many occurrences in
the Indias in the past few years, all the misfortunes of invasions have
come from carelessness. I have solicited the Priest not to have this
done and even refused to let him have the soldiers to follow in the
procession, but he is very impertinent and says the church belongs to
him and he shall do as it pleases him. Since the 28th of May we have
been in arms awaiting the enemy, and I sent the Priest word not to ring
by one of the soldiers, then by the Sergeant-Major--in spite of my
message he rang the bells from half-past ten at night until half-past
two o’clock. To avoid danger from this, I have given orders that none of
the soldiers attend. If he desists from ringing I will allow him all the
soldiers necessary. Things will work thus until your Majesty orders
otherwise for the safety of this Garrison. God grant you long life.

DIEGO QUIROBA.

St. Augustine, Fla., August 16th, 1689.

       *       *       *       *       *


TESTIMONY WHICH ACCOMPANIES THIS LETTER.

In the City of St. Augustine, Fla., May 28th, 1689.

The Captain of Cuirassiers, Don Diego Quiroba y Losada, Governor and
Captain-General of this city and Province, by order of your Majesty.

Says: That this Garrison being in arms and awaiting signals since
Sunday, the 22nd. The church has on several occasions rung the bells
after midnight in taking out the Holy Sacrament, continuing the ringing
for two hours or more, without ceasing. This is contrary to all customs
in Spain and the Indias, where the sacrament is not carried in pomp
after night, but only by the Priest, the sacristan and two other persons
who carry the lights. In a close Garrison it is more strictly observed,
and for that reason should be more strictly enforced in this Garrison,
as such things are risky, especially as we are under arms, and injury
might result, as it would give the enemy time and opportunity to
accomplish their intentions. We are trying to stand on the defensive and
it might injure this very church itself. For this reason I sent word to
the Priest, Don Alonzo de Legurion, Parish Priest and Vicar of this
city, in all due form by St. Sebastian Lopez begging him to cease the
ringing and setting forth the danger which could result. That he should
not go out in pomp, but ask for all the soldiers he wanted and they
would be sent. He would not listen, and threatened the Lieutenant with
excommunication should he return. Another message I sent by the
Sergeant-Major, Pedro Arauda y Avellanedas, to whom he made the same
reply, stating that the Church was his and he would ring when he
pleased--it had been given him by the Pontificate, and the Governor had
nothing to do with it, and must not meddle. Such language and conduct
disturbs the public peace. That all this may be certified to I have
ordered testimony taken of the case and had the Sergeant-Major and
Adjutant Sebastian Lopez examined, and so I sent it and sign

DIEGO QUIROBA Y LOSADA.

Appeared before me, Alonzo Solano, Notary Public of the government, in
the City of St. Augustine, Fla., as witness.

SEBASTIAN LOPEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 22nd, 1689.

Captain Diego Quiroba y Losada, Governor and Captain-General of said
city, ordered to appear before me, the Adjutant, Sebastian Lopez, who is
the actual Sergeant-Major in the Garrison, who was in my presence
received and sworn in by the Notary Public, in the name of God and the
Holy Cross, and having promised to tell nothing but the truth. Asked for
the tenor of the Auto at the head of this Document, he said: That at
about half-past two o’clock the bells of the church of this City were
ringing. Having started out, his Lordship, the Governor, called him and
ordered him to take a message to the Priest, telling him that he knew
well that the City was in arms, the enemy being on this coast, and they
had received signals that the vessels were in sight of the City, and to
cease ringing the bells as the noise would prevent them from hearing the
signal “to arms.” That coming to the church he told the Priest to stop
ringing, that it made too much noise. The Priest’s reply was to order
him to leave the church under pain of excommunication, the witness
returned three times with the Governor’s Message, but no attention was
paid to his Lordship’s Message, and the bells continued to ring. That
this is the truth, under sworn oath he states and affirms and that he is
twenty-two years old and he signs it.

SEBASTIAN LOPEZ TOLEDO.

Before me, Alonzo Solano, Notary Public and of the Government. It agrees
with the original of which mention has been made and which I send.
Executed in St. Augustine, Fla., on July 15th, 1689.

ALONZO SOLANO,
Notary Public and of the Government.

       *       *       *       *       *

By Cedule of your Majesty dated in Madrid, July 18th, 1674, you ask for
a statement of the order pursued in the functions of the Edicts of Faith
and Anathena and the places where they conduct the Holy Tribunal of the
Inquisition. And also the cause of the controversies offered by the city
whenever they are performed and what has been done this year. The city
to avoid all scandal resolved to allow the Commissioner of the
Inquisition to conduct things his own way--taking testimony of all the
proceedings to report to your Majesty. These acts have no fixed time,
but left to the arbitration of the Commissioner who has them when he
pleases, every two, three, and even six years. After discussion it was
decided not to have them executed this year, as it is not a regular
custom, and we wished to report before giving more examples of
dissensions. For twenty years the City has allowed itself to be fined
for neglect of duty in assisting at the performances. As there is no
Tribunal of Inquisition here the Commissioner succeeded in getting the
City to go to his house for him, and he, precedes the City. In church,
his place to be on the Gospel side, with the humility recognized in such
places. The decision of this controversy seems to depend on Law 20,
Chapter 26, of the ninth recompilation of the Indias. This last, the
Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition pretends is only understood by your
Majesty, the Viceroys and Captain-Generals in whom are found a living
representation. So that to represent the Holy Tribunal of the
Inquisition the power is solely invested in your Commissioner--from this
comes the act of tramping under foot your Government, whom the
Commissioner tries to subdue in all, to his will, as well as the Notary
Public and Ministers. That a stop may be put to his audaciousness it has
seemed wise and prudent to make a report with testimonies attached to
your Majesty, that you may act as you deem proper in the case.

May God grant you long life.

SEVERINO MAUSANEDA.

Havana, March 17th, 1690.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1691.

_Your Highness_:

Don Diego Quiroga y Lorada, Governor and Captain-General of the Province
of Florida, in a letter dated January 8th, 1690, gives you an account of
the general review which he passed on the soldiers of infantry and
militia of that Garrison. He proposed the advantages and security
occurring to the City by building a wall from the Fort, the whole length
of the City along the sea, seeing the danger in which it now is of being
ruined by floods from the sea (which already comes up to the houses)
when we have the slightest storm. The soldiers seeing the necessity of
it, immediately offered what they could, the citizens of the Province
doing likewise, that the work might advance. I send a certificate
showing that the amount of the offering they have made is ten thousand
dollars, and that they will use every effort to build the wall, and they
have commenced to get out the stone and other necessary things. I
implore your Highness to designate a sum to help build this wall, which
is so important and that these poor soldiers and citizens may feel
encouraged to give more, seeing that your Majesty helps them in such
needed work, since nothing less depends upon this wall than the
preventing a flood of the place and separating the Castle, losing all
that has been spent in the building of it. The Board is obliged to
represent you. What the voluntary contributions of the soldiers and
citizens of the Province is for the building of this wall, estimate the
cost of it, and how much will be needed to continue the work, and with
this and what you order, the Count of Galva, Viceroy of the New Spain,
must send to Florida the sum of two thousand dollars, that the Governor
may apply it to this work, and that he inform the Board of the size,
latitude and thickness, the design of it, that they may better
understand it. And that the Royal Officers certify that said portion of
the two thousand dollars was spent on this work, sending an exact
account and cause. Then, the soldiers and citizens of Florida seeing
that your Majesty takes an interest in them and helps them, will feel
encouraged to continue subscribing. You will decide as most convenient.

Madrid, August 11th, 1691.


THE KING.

     _To the Field Marshal Don Diego Quiroga y Losada--My Governor and
     Captain-General of the City of St. Augustine, in the Province of
     Florida, or to the Person or Persons in Whose Care His Government
     May Be_:

In a letter of June the 8th, 1640, it refers, among other things, that
you have sought the means of spending the money assigned for the
purchasing of canvas and provisions for the Indians of the Pass of the
River Salamototo, as was evident by the certificate and agreement that
together with the Royal Officers of that city you made. Seeing all in my
Council of War of the Indians--how special attention was called to the
new tax imposed for the canoes that serve as transports at the referred
river, I have resolved to order and command you (as I do) that the
moment you receive this order, that you revoke the one by which you have
distinguished yourself together with the Royal Officers, as the
agreement of the 1st of February, of 1698, being worthy of reproof, the
one that you and they are working in this matter, without any orders
whatsoever from me--as should always be the case in questions of this
nature especially when my royal soul is so moved towards the Indians, my
desire so great, that they should be civilized and treated not alone as
my vassals, but as my own children subjugating them and attending to
their wants and comfort. Thus you will proceed to revoke what you have
done. Advise my Royal Officers by dispatch of the date that they take
note of this resolution in the books under their charge--so that at all
times it shall be evident. And I also command that you immediately have
published and posted proclamations to this effect in all public places
in the city and Province inserting to the letter in the proclamation the
contents of this dispatch, and sending to the board by the first
opportunity presenting itself, testimony of having executed this
procedure. A fine of a thousand reals imposed upon you, to be remitted
if you do not execute this order immediately in the form that I have
imposed and commanded. And that the canoes remain and be paid as they
have been up to the present, and as they were up to the date when you
imposed the above expressed tax. And you shall advise me clearly and
plainly what has been the amount of these taxes up to the date of
receipt of this dispatch, and if there be any portion of it, you have it
placed at once in my Royal Chest in that city, to remain there until
receiving my further orders. So does it suit me and my Royal service.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE COUNCIL.

Continuing the account of investigations which have been obtained and
were promised in a letter of October 22nd to ascertain with certainty of
the excesses committed by the Governor of Florida, Don Francisco Moral
Sanchez.

The Council makes known that the events are so strange and
extraordinary, which by divers means have been understood to have taken
place in that Garrison and its administration, that the very excess
itself stuns one with astonishment and paralyzes the credulity of our
mind--but, having complied with his duty as commanded, he explains: That
he is quite assured of the truth of the report of the Engineer Don
Antonio Arredondo, who was an eye-witness and had no reason whatever to
judge him otherwise than impartially, being in no conceivable manner
dependent. That his report agrees in every particular with the other
letters written of the excesses of the above mentioned Governor as will
be recognized by the document which accompanies this and is certified to
by the Engineer Arredondo at the continuation of them in a private
declaration made by the decree expedited for this purpose.

That the few Indians of our faith represent and express their true
sentiments, as indicated by a document I remit to this Council, through
the Rev. Bishop of Micale, which they obliged Señor Arredondo to receive
and remit to your Majesty. That other certificates of military and
private individuals of that Garrison, with other documents which
accompany this, and not only confirm, but add such scandalous excesses
of the private life of that Governor, that it is impossible to find
decent and decorous words with which to express them. And some of these
words are from the mouth of religious Monks and Priests who affirm all
these letters as well as the one written by Don Antonio Benavides--there
are also later letters giving accounts of the same proceedings.

Besides the scandalous reports being certified to by all, in about the
same manner, they accuse the Governor of his treatment of the Captain of
Grenadiers Don Felipe de Iturrieta, commandant of the detached troops,
forgetting his personal merits, and official position, and his being a
person of implicit integrity. He had him thrust into prison in a most
shameful and scandalous manner--even depriving him of the resources of
writing--and after trampling him in every way he incriminates him for
disobedience in the performance of his duties--a mere pretense, for it
was that this Officer refused to neglect his duty or allow his men to do
so, by being off guard at the Barracks, where it is imperative,
according to all military laws that guards should be at their post. The
Governor wishing the men for his private purposes ignored or formed
false conception of military duties and suspended and imprisoned the
Captain. Of the same nature is the charge made against him of violating
the Royal ordinance and defying it--when he replied to the Governor in
words which would rather indicate respect. It is a shameful act to treat
an Officer of honor of his well known character, who has the heavy
responsibilities which are recognized as belonging to said Captain, and
are certified to in the statements of the circumstances, as also a
petition in which is set forth all that has occurred, and imploring that
justice be shown Captain Iturrieta that he may not be stigmatized. While
all written in these reports and certificates are true, I did not depose
him immediately from office until I received the report asked of the
Bishop of Micale, knowing his prudence and virtue and that his word
would be more approved than all else in the case. In the meantime while
awaiting his report I am taking every step to conquer the difficulties
which may arise to name a subject who can act in the interim, because it
seems the need is so great that it is impossible to form any resolution
whatever in the case pending in that Province, and this consideration
has suspended all movement of removing him until the order comes for
doing so. This in our judgment being more prudent, as the referred to
Governor is so engrossed in his private affairs as certified to in the
papers of Don A. Arredondo, in which he speaks of the Barracks for
lodging the soldiers, and the looking into this matter belongs to the
Viceroy of New Spain--that in proper time he take the precautions which
he deems most essential.

Concluding with the disposal of the reports, and taking the less
scandalous means to depose the Governor of Florida, Don Francisco Moral
Sanchez, as he has not been forewarned of what is to happen, it seems
doubtful which is the best means to adopt, we will therefore consider
the matter with more deliberation proceeding in the safest and most
certain way and rendering a personal account as quickly as possible
thereafter.

THE COUNCIL.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Excellent Lord_:

In conformity with what your Excellency desires, and satisfying the
private order sent me, asking a report and true statement of affairs
under the Governor Don Francisco Morales Sanchez. To assure myself from
a responsibility devoid of all partiality, and to the truth of the
excesses perpetrated by this Governor and a few other private
individuals and priests, of which that Garrison wrote you a complaint,
asking that you immediatly depose the Governor and name some one in his
place, _pro tem._, so that your Majesty being informed, may place some
one who looks more to your interests. For this purpose you sent me a
blank dispatch, that in time, I might fill out with the names of the
subject elected and the investigation I had made in this affair. I must
say, that they are so strange and extraordinary, and such divers means
used in their performance--that the accounts I hear in this garrison
chill the soul and congeal the blood in one’s veins. There is no way of
hiding the misery and misfortune to which this Garrison is exposed. With
the same truthfulness I must expose the fact, that I am positively
certain from the reports of the Engineer Don Antonio Arredondo, as an
eye-witness, that all the excesses committed by this Governor are
strictly true as written you and certified to in a report from this
Garrison.

The few Indians of our faith represent and express their lamentable
sentiments on a paper written you, and sent through the Rev. Bishop of
Micale. Other certificates of priests, military men, and private
individuals of that Garrison, which I enclose add such scandalous
excesses in the manner of living of that Governor that I cannot find
decent words in which to express it. Some of these are signed by the
same priests who wrote to Don Antonio Benavides, and there are others,
citing what the Governor has perpetrated on the Captain of Grenadiers,
Don Felipe Iturricta, whom I sent there. Forgetting his merits and that
he was a person of implicit confidence, whom I trusted for his
unimpeachable conduct, they have placed him in prison under scandalous
circumstances, intending to take from him the management of the troops
over whom I placed him. He has been under the most rigorous guard,
searching even his food, depriving him of the privilege of writing to
ask for a hearing, accusing him of crimes and lack of obedience. They
have no other course, in my opinion, than a pretext, as this Officer has
fulfilled his duty with promptness and rectitude, showing only the
ordinary precautions observed in the regiments for infinite reasons. The
guards cannot be excused from the Barracks where the troop is
stationed--which is one of the principal rudiments of military
tactics--as well for safety as anything which might occur. The Captain
insisted on maintaining these principles from which has arisen this
trouble, and the assigning of the wrong conception of duty and want of
obedience preferred against him. Of the same nature is the other charge:
that he had defied the Governor. To this Captain Iturricta replied: if
you were not the Governor you could not use such language to me--showing
that he respected the office of Governor. The Governor does not seem to
recognize the respect due to a man and Officer of standing and
distinguished character, and let me add incidentally, placed here by me,
as commandante of a detached body, to encourage and hold this fagged out
Garrison. They should consider it an honor, for so distinguished a
personage to accept this place, and so honorably discharge his duty.
Your Majesty will understand all from the report of said Captain and the
testimonials stating the circumstances. I also enclose a petition from
the Captain in which he implores you to do him justice, a virtue so in
keeping with your Royal heart, and not allow an officer of his standing
to remain in disgrace. I can positively assure you, that had not the
Captain and other Officers been true and faithful to their duty, they
could have caused much trouble among the inhabitants of this Garrison,
from this unjust act. Although I have reported all the abuses said to
have been committed by the present Governor of Florida, and you should
place some one of experience and good conduct in his place. I hope that
your Majesty with your great experience, will pardon me for troubling
you on the present occasion, and look unprejudiced into this affair. All
that has been said of the matter, and all that I have been commanded in
so important a trust--I am trying to investigate to the very root. Going
cautiously, feeling my way, trying to right troubles without any
scandal, so that I may send you the name of some worthy subject who can
act _pro tem._ in that capacity--as, from all the information I have
expounded it seems urgent you should remove this man, so as to restore
the confidence your vassals have in your Majesty, and the responsibility
I represent. The engineer, Don Antonio Arredondo, assures me no other
expedient can be taken, while the present Governor is so engrossed in
his own private interests, as you may infer from the last chapter.

Regarding the Barracks for lodging the hundred men, it is an evident
fact, that but for the persistent effort of the Engineer Arredondo, they
would have been returned to that Kingdom. All of which he reported to
the Viceroy of Mexico that he might take the necessary precautions.
Having disposed of the duty of having the Governor removed, I am
doubtful of what will be best to do next toward your Majesty’s
interests, but I shall act as in my judgment seems best and as
circumstances present themselves.

May God preserve you.

JUAN FRANCISCO HORCASITAS.




CHAPTER XV.

A. D. 1708-1723.

     _Letter from Francisco Carcoles y Martinez to his Majesty reports
     all possible measures taken to prevent the enemy from destroying
     this Province--The Indians, aided by the English who supply them
     with guns, ammunition, knives and pistols, come from the Indian
     villages bordering the Carolinas and carry off each day certain
     persons--Families and Christians taken off to be sold into
     slavery--More than ten thousand up to the present have
     disappeared--A treaty urged with the English of the Carolinas, else
     there will be a continuation of war and the spread of the Holy
     Gospel impeded--In a second letter the Governor gives an account of
     certain Friars who are getting up a dispute and lawsuit with the
     Priest of the Parish concerning the right and whose right to marry
     soldiers, Spaniards, Indians or mixed Indians--These disputes
     brought before the Governor to settle, who in turn refers them to
     his Majesty--Recommends the abolishing of all Heathen customs--By a
     Royal dispatch, A. D. 1721, the Governor of Florida is commanded to
     go in person to the Governor of the Carolinas and arrange with him
     the observance of the Treaty of Peace between the English and
     Spanish of those Provinces adjoining, which same was carried out as
     far as possible--A letter from the Governor, Antonio Benavides,
     reports the sending of clothing and trinkets to pacify the Casiques
     and Chiefs of the Province of Apalachicola--Find the Indians
     restless and making preparations for war--English spreading
     dissatisfaction--A Council of War decides to send a vessel to
     Havana for arms, men and provisions in anticipation of troubulous
     times._


THE GOVERNOR’S LETTER.

A. D. 1708.

_Your Lordship_:

My principal care since assuming control as Governor has been to procure
by all possible means to prevent the enemy from destroying at once this
Province, and the few natives of it who have remained. When I took
possession I called a meeting of the Board to discuss matters and we
decided to retire the troops from the town of Santa Fe, adding those of
San Francisco and the infantry that was at the pass of Salamototo river,
as I have already informed you on the 20th of November, 1706, so that
with a larger force we might resist the enemy, and the citizens of this
City feel some relief. I had built on the line a thick palisade, as I
informed you. I have also organized a company of cavalry who should go
about on the skirts, as they have done, to gather up stores and guard
the carpenters and persons who go out to work cutting timber for the
Royal buildings. This has not sufficed to stop the enemy from continuing
their scalping and hostilities which are being constantly felt. They
come from the Indian villages bordering on the Carolinas, aided by the
English, who supply them with guns, ammunition, knives and pistols; at
times they even accompany them, which strengthens and encourages them
so that all the terra firma along the southern coast is desolate. And
each day the number of families these Indians carry off is increased.
The Christians have all disappeared, no doubt they have taken and sold
them into slavery--more than ten or twelve thousand persons have gone. I
have about three hundred with men, women and children. Even these are
being carried away daily, when they go out to gather (guano) palmetto
with which the Indians clothe themselves--and wild roots which they use
for eating, not having sufficient with the Royal Rations which we daily
allow them. Today they bring me an account of how they carried off ---- to
Mica, who had gone out in search of roots--in all they have carried
today twenty-eight persons, four of whom escaped and have brought the
news. The fact of there being some capitulation of peace would be much
added to the service of God and your Majesty by relieving us of these
miserable Indians. All the natives from this Province are sold,
imprisoned or detained in the Carolinas. If a treaty could be made with
England to prevent the English in Carolina from supplying them with
arms, ammunition, etc., for it is with this they make war against us,
and the dexterity with which they use them is amazing--as though they
had been brought up to their use. Unless such a treaty can be
immediately reached, hostilities will continue, and in this America
there will never be anything but war. And the English will always have
the Indians on their side, as they protect them and furnish them with
arms and ammunition, as they have done heretofore. Unless this treaty
can be effected immediately, the best thing for us to do will be to
abandon the place entirely, as you have sug-gested, before they
desolate it. But as it is so important to the Crown and the vast
importance and revenue which will and can be derived from it would make
it deplorable to give it up now. Besides the great importance of
spreading the Holy Gospel, as it is being done, has made me delay in
giving you this necessary information.

May God guard you for many years as a true Christian.

FRANCISCO CÓRCOLES Y MARTINEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., January 14th, 1708.


LETTER OF THE GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA TO HIS MAJESTY.

A. D. 1708.

_Sire_:

The continued coming of the enemy who took up quarters at San Francisco
Garrison, caused the natives to retire to this Garrison to seek
protection under the Royal arms. From the same fear, the palisade castle
of Salamototo having been attacked, the few natives withdrew, running
from the cruel ravages of these enemies. About eight or nine persons
having called a meeting to discuss the matter of evacuating these
Garrisons, the board decided that for the safety and better security of
these natives it would be best to evacuate them. A more extensive
account is given you in the testimony of each thing that I remit with
this information, so that you may be well notified of the reasons for
retiring from these two towns and others near them, that had already
been deserted. We have assigned them land near by, in line of the cannon
of this Royal Fort, and we are maintaining them and helping with the
best we can at your expense and from the Royal warehouses so that they
may not perish until they can till the land and raise a crop to help
support themselves, until things take a better turn. I hope your Majesty
will approve and accept in good faith the step taken by the Board and
that I am working and maintaining these natives for the best and
greatest service of your Majesty. May God guard you as a Christian.

FRANCISCO CÓRCOLES Y MARTINEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., November 30th, 1708.


LETTER OF THE GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA TO HIS MAJESTY.

A. D. 1709.

_Sire_:

I write to give you an account of the Friars of San Francisco. Fray
Francisco, Teacher of the Gospel at Santa Maria de Guale, and the
guardian of this Convent, Fray Martin de Molina, have been trying to get
up lawsuits and have had disputes with the Pastor of this Parish, Don
Pedro Lorenzo Acevido. These Friars are opposed to having the Pastor
marry the soldiers or any Spaniard to the Indians or mixed Indians,
wishing themselves to administer this and the other sacraments to them
and their children. For this they have drawn up Autos and presented them
to me that I might grant them justice. I referred them each to your
Majesty, suggesting that they draw up their testimony and I am to
reserve the right of informing you on the subject. I therefore call to
your Royal attention how these law suits, occurring daily, only tend to
disturb the peace. This is all done, because these Friars, to obtain the
fee, wish now to administer these sacraments, which have been
administered for the last thirty years by the parish priest of this
parish, who has performed the marriage ceremony and had them watch
(velar) from the fathers down to the grandchildren, without once
interfering with the rights of these Friars to administer to their own
people, the Indians in the towns they have charge of, and whose language
they understand, and as is customary, if a soldier or any one wishes to
marry an Indian or mixed Indian they must do so in the Parish and church
to which the Indian belongs--thus, by degrees, leaving off all Heathen
customs. Your Majesty after seeing the Autos and receiving this
information will decide as he thinks best and most desirable for the
good of all. May God preserve your Royal person that you may show
justice.

FRANCISCO CÓRCOLES Y MARTINEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., September 12th, 1709.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1722.

_Sire_:

By your Royal dispatch of May 25th of last year, 1721, you commanded me
that taking advantage of the suspension of arms and the friendly
relations I had observed with the English of the Carolinas since then;
that your request at the Court of London had been granted. That under
all these circumstances I should go in my official capacity to the
Governor of Carolina and arrange with him to observe strictly the
Treaty, that the vexation among the Indians who were allied to the two
nations should cease. I immediately complied with your order and sent
the Contador, Don Francisco Menendez, accompanied by other officials,
from this Garrison, with the commission of having a firm agreement with
the Governor of Carolina to make the Indians attached to his nation and
to cease aggravating those with us, and thus live in peace and
tranquility, pursuing agriculture. This peace being as important to one
nation as the other, for, should war be declared, there would be no end
to it. To this proposition and others as certified in the accompanying
letter which I take this occasion of sending you, the Governor and
Parliament of the Carolinas replied that they had received no such
orders from the King of Great Britain, but that notwithstanding he would
try to enforce peace during the suspension of arms. Immediately upon the
arrival of Don F. Menendez in the Carolinas he was notified that the
English had constructed a wooden fort on the tongue at the mouth of
Talauje Province on your Majesty’s territory, where, for many years the
Indians and Guajas were settled and by reason of the siege this nation
put on this Garrison, they had retired to where they still are. Don
Francisco Menendez hearing this, considered it wrong for them to
trespass upon your Territory, and so stated it to the Governor, and also
that he feared harm would result from it. The reply given was: that the
King of Great Britain had ordered them to strengthen his dominions with
fortifications in any form they deemed expedient. Under different
pretexts the “Contador” tried to have them show the order, but they
refused to do so, saying it was sufficient that they said they had the
order, and the Governor of Florida had nothing at all to do with it.
From which I infer, your Lordship, that with the arrival of this new
Governor in these colonies, not only will he complete the building of
this Fort and settlement, but that he will also settle all the islands
belonging to this jurisdiction, thus making the Carolinas impregnable
and reducing this Garrison to a more lamentable state than it is in
today on account of its easy access to the Indians who would immediately
come to possess themselves of the ammunition and arms which it is the
very heighth of their ambition to obtain. So Menendez learned that
provision had been made by the English Government to equip this Colony,
and they were awaiting, at any moment, vessels with supplies and arms.
Then, at a moment’s notice, they will invade this Castle, it being their
great ambition, and the only and sole aim of it, to capture this Fort
for the protection of the New England, and the great use they could make
of it in capturing your Majesty’s vessels coming through the Bahama
Channel. In giving you this information I feel that I not only comply
with my royal duty, but also discharge the debt to my conscience in
showing you the danger of this Province. With this intelligence you can
act as most agreeable and convenient. May God preserve your Royal
personage for many years.

ANTONIO BENAVIDES.

St. Augustine, Fla., Apr. 21st, 1722.

       *       *       *       *       *

The letter accompanying it:

St. Augustine, Fla., Feb. 11th, 1722.

Finding myself with an order from the King of Spain, my Lord and Master,
for security with this and that government of reciprocal relations
regarding the hostilities which on one and the other side has been
completed, for the welfare of the Indians, I resolved to send to the
Carolinas the “Contador” Don Francisco Menendez Marques, with other
officials accompanying him, to confer with his Excellency and the Lords
of Parliament for some agreement by which the annoyances of the infidel
Indians toward those attached to our nation, might cease, and they be
allowed to continue their agricultural pursuits without further
disturbances and incentives--and not forgetting the agreement with Don
Francisco Menendez Marques that during the suspension of arms, they try
not to hostile the Indians of this Nation. That I, for my government,
will keep them in subjection as I have done ever since the news of
suspension of arms arrived, but that, if they should in any way fail in
their agreement, they might rest assured that I shall take vengeance,
and nothing shall deter me but their absolute subjection to our
agreement. I shall make all necessary provision and watch with zeal, as
I am fully persuaded that the keeping of this reciprocal agreement is
the only foundation for tranquility and peace. Your Excellency will
acknowledge receipt of this, and the agreement reached with Señor
Menendez Marquez, that I may report to our King and Master.

ANTONIO BENAVIDES.


TO THE KING FROM THE GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA.

_Sire_:

I place in your Royal hands the testimony of the letter written me by
the Commandant whom I have in charge of the Garrison and Fort of San
Marco, forwarded to him by Lieutenant Don Diego Pena who, by order, was
sent to visit the Province of Apalachicola, with clothing and trinkets
to gratify the Casiques and Chiefs. Both inform me that the Province of
the Talepuses and others partial to the English of the Carolinas, are
restless and trying to destroy the nation of Arinaco who yield obedience
to this government. That they are making all preparations for war, which
from the evil designs we may soon expect. The number of the discontented
is far in the ascendency of those who seem to be on our side, but in
whom we can place no confidence, they being so deceitful. Then again,
the fear they may entertain seeing that the English are mustering the
Indians of so many nations and spreading dissatisfaction among them,
against the Spaniards. The news given us by the Lieutenant that some of
those we should and ought to trust have him detained in Colache from
where he wrote this letter which, with the one from the commandant, I
attach to these “Autos.” Of the steps taken by the Council of War, whom
I called together to discuss this matter, I will not send you testimony
nor in any way trouble you. I shall only make known to your Royal
intelligence that the Council of War decided to send a vessel to Havana
with letters to the Governor of that place, that he might aid us in
sending provisions, arms and men--the latter to land at some point
further down and, taking horses, make their way in by land. The enemy
may already have the place blockaded. Should you decide that this plan
ought not to be carried out I am willing to sacrifice my life to have
the disturbances among these Nations cease, and that all under control
of this Government should live in peace, without any of the prejudices
of those who disturb them. Besides, as is written in the Holy Gospel,
“we will ravish the enemy, punish and destroy them.” But, my Lord, the
condition of this garrison is such that it will be impossible for us to
hold out for any length of time. The rapidity with which they are
gathering and preparing indicates we are to have serious and trying
times. Ever since 1702 our forces have been falling off, and we are
weak. In giving you this information I am stating truths and fulfill my
duty. Act as in your judgment with the aid of God is best.

ANTONIO BENAVIDES.

St. Augustine, Fla., August 18th, 1723.




CHAPTER XVI.

A. D. 1736-1739.

     _In a letter to his Majesty Governor Señor Montiano says it is
     reported that Don Diego Oglethorpe has said openly “that should he
     receive orders from his Government to fix the boundary limits
     between the Spanish possessions and the Carolinas he would so delay
     the execution that there should never be a sign of these
     limits”--Montiano thinks it would be wise for such a gentleman to
     be removed as it can never be possible to discuss questions of
     importance with him--In A. D. 1738 the same Governor reports the
     result of a trip of investigation by one Juan Ygnacio de los Reyes,
     an Indian--Under the pretext of giving himself up from having
     killed an Indian, he gains much information concerning the English,
     their plans against the Spanish, misleading the English as to the
     strength, numbers and condition of Spanish fortifications, finally
     escaping under pretext of hunting--Returns with valuable
     information to the Spanish--Statement of what has been ordered
     regarding the aid to Florida Provinces, the dislodging of the enemy
     from certain settlements on its territory, since its government up
     to 1674--Dispatch of 1675 commands that if the negro slaves sent to
     Havana have not already been sold, they shall be sent to Florida,
     to be put to work on the construction of the Castle to relieve the
     Indians._


LETTER FOR HIS MAJESTY FROM THE GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA, SEÑOR MONTIANO.

_My Lord_:

In a letter of the 28th of March of this year, you were kind enough to
acknowledge receipt of my letter of August 14th of last year, in which I
reported that Don Diego Oglethorpe, Commander of the English colonies,
had said openly that although he should receive orders from his King and
Court to fix the boundary limits between this government’s possessions
and those of the Carolinas, he would delay the execution of it, so that
there should never be a sign of these limits, and they must bear this
always in mind, for whatever might present itself. With this
intelligence it would be well to relieve these Colonies of such a man,
because on questions of importance upon any occurrence which should need
discussion, it would be exceedingly troublesome to manage a gentleman
who even refuses to answer my former letters. This is all I can say on
the subject--placing it before your Sovereign Majesty to whom God grant
many years.

MANUEL MONTIANO.

St. Augustine, Fla., August 11th, 1736.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. D. 1738.

Information given by the Indian, Juan Ygnacio de los Reyes, of the
Iquaha Nation, one of the neighbors of the town of Pocotalaca in the
immediate vicinity of this Garrison. He says: That he left under my
orders on the 4th of July of this year to go to the neighboring English
colony, and ascertain by as many ways and artifices as he could, their
intentions, the state or condition they are in, and everything. He took
a small canoe at the Fort of Picolata and went down that river and
sailed through the mouth of the Sarabai, going as far as the Fort of San
Pedro, which belongs to the English, meditating upon what scheme he
should take to gain all this information, and not go about hiding and
endangering his life needlessly. He thought of delivering himself up, as
he did, pretending that he had killed an Indian here, and was fleeing
not to be hung; that he was seeking protection from them. On learning
this he was favorably received, and could see a Fort which was square
and stockaded with two pieces and a cannon looking seaward; in it was a
detachment of twenty soldiers more or less, there is no neighborhood,
and saw but four houses before coming to the Fort or Stockade; a few
laborers planting corn; that the soldiers who are there are from a small
vessel or Piroque of war, intended to seek the mouths of rivers; that
from this Fort of San Pedro he was taken by two soldiers to the Bar of
Ballenas, that is where the first place called San Andres is, there he
saw a number of soldiers drilling with spears, and although he did not
then know their exact number, he afterwards learned in St. Simons from
Lieutenant-Colonel Cochran that there were three hundred; that he there
saw a number of houses, newly built and close together as in Havana, a
number of English women, wives of the soldiers, but he could not tell
the number of houses in the place; that there is also a square Fort,
with four cannon, towards the sea, and on the other side he could not
see; that there were small guard houses around it. He could not see if
they had artillery, because they would not allow him too near; that from
here to the sea inland by the Bay there is a thick palisade of earth
with a parapet and at the extreme end there is a wharf and they told him
that there they had flints for the Spaniards, and they keep a launch
ready and armed so that at any moment of the day or night she can be
used. She is manned with sixteen men. They carried him to St. Simons to
the presence of Colonel Cochran. Immediately upon his arrival there,
they sent six soldiers with bayonets to escort him to the Colonel’s
house. He was asked where he was going, he replied to seek protection
and favor from them; he had killed an Indian in St. Augustine. Colonel
Cochran extended his hand to him, but when he went to take it he only
gave him one finger. He was asked about the Armada which was to
encounter them; how many vessels and men it brought. He told them he had
not seen it, but had heard there were a hundred vessels with more than
4,000 men, and that the Governor of St. Augustine had told them to
return, that he did not wish to hurt the English. He was asked how many
troops were in this Garrison--he replied that there used to be four
companies of one hundred soldiers on horse, but that recently five more
companies of one hundred men each had arrived. They then asked if there
was much silver in Florida. He replied: Yes, as there were so many
soldiers, money flowed freely. Then Colonel Cochran told him all that
would soon belong to the King of Great Britain. He was then asked about
the Castle and Garrison. He told them the Castle had one hundred and
sixty cannons so large he could not reach around them; the Garrison had
twelve bulwarks with ten cannon each. To which Colonel Cochran told him:
Well, see here; when you hear that General Oglethorpe, whom I am
expecting with seven thousand men, has arrived, then you will see me
place a vessel of war at the mouth of the Bar, and prevent any food from
entering Florida. On the keys I shall place others and no one shall
enter Havana, expressing himself in such a way as to say that the King
of England would gain more by taking Florida than Gibraltar; that while
that was advantageous, this would yield them a great deal more. This
conversation was continued, asking if the Castle could be reached if
there was water inside, to all of which he told them it was impossible.
Speaking of the Governor, he asked for a grape arbor he had in his
house, said to yield great quantities of grapes. He told them the
Governor was a saintly man, and that while he knew him to be so good, he
could not help but flee from the punishment he knew he deserved for
killing the Indian, because the Governor was also a just man. That it
was true he had a grape arbor producing large quantities of grapes.
Colonel Cochran then said: Very well, within one or two years we will
make our wine and whiskey there. He says that day and night he never
tired asking about Florida; that now they were fortifying to afterwards
come and take it; that in St. Simons he had three hundred troops, as
many more in San Andres and Sabanato. He had brought these to take
Florida, but hearing of the Spanish Armada, they had desisted and sent
for seven thousand more men, whom Oglethorpe would bring, and upon the
arrival of this Commander in less than two months they would gather
506,000 Indians; that he would make his entrance by the river St. Johns
in schooners and small vessels and disembark at a place some seven
leagues distant from Florida, where they had two small ports. These Juan
Ygnacio saw with his own eyes, where they have the men they were
drilling at San Andres. That in St. Simons he saw ten squares with ten
houses and seventy houses in six squares, the other four squares were
not completed. That in each of the houses they lodged six soldiers. That
he also saw a Fort with fifteen cannon, and as it was in a bad
condition, they were making brick to rebuild it. That going out to hunt,
he came near the house of “Frederico” distant from St. Simons three
leagues more or less. The English would not allow him to enter there,
but turned him back to St. Simons. That about one league from this place
he saw a vessel called the Mamal, and there he saw them building six
large houses in which they had fifty men, that they had large timber
works. This he knows positively, having been there twice. That Cochran
and another Englishman whom he thinks they call William Houston, he
overheard say that they had offered the Indians fifty dollars for every
Spanish scalp they killed, black or white, or Christian Indian, any one
partial to Spain. That his escape to return was accomplished in the
following manner: That one Thursday at ten o’clock in the morning he
told Cochran that he was going hunting, if he found no game he would
remain over night and fish, returning the next day; he allowed him to
go; taking advantage of the occasion he took his canoe and sailed along
the rivers until Friday morning, when he got on terra firma, leaving
his canoe he walked two days in the direction of the sunset, then
crossed over the land and at the end of ten days he was on the St. Johns
river where he found the launch from this Garrison, which is there on
guard. Having called and taken his shirt for a flag, they went and
brought him over. The same day he started for this place where he
arrived at twelve o’clock at night and gave the information as I send
it.

MANUEL MONTIANO.

St. Augustine, Fla., Aug. 20th, 1738.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a Cedula of June 20th, 1671, the Viceroy of New Spain has been
ordered to communicate with the Governor of Florida, hoping that through
his zeal much can be accomplished in the cause of the English,
preventing them from getting a strong foothold so near the mouth of the
river St. Elena, which would be prejudicial to our interests. Therefore
the Viceroy is requested to give all the aid required. As to the
proposed fortification to this Port for its defense, do what is
necessary to defend the Province and communicate also with the Viceroy
whom I have commanded to try and give all the assistance possible,
always bearing in mind not to violate the laws of the capitulation of
peace. The Governor of Havana being nearest to Florida was also
commanded to communicate with the Governor of Florida and render all the
aid and assistance possible in the dislodging of the English from the
river St. Elena, who if remaining in said place would cause much
trouble. The Governor of Florida must also keep him informed of the
state of affairs. In a letter dated April, 1671, the Viceroy Marquez de
Mancera gives an account of the aid sent to the Garrison of St.
Augustine in accordance with Cedula received. The papers showing that
this aid had been received and approved by the Council of War,
accompanying this letter, which also states the order given the Governor
of New Spain to be very careful in keeping a continual correspondence
with the Governor of Florida, send supplies promptly, and notify the
Viceroy of all that occurs. Act in every way for the best security of
that Garrison, using the greatest diligence in its fortification and
defense, being as I understand of such importance. State what steps have
been taken in regard to the fortification that was to be built, and to
which reference is made in this dispatch to the Governor Manuel Cendovia
and if the supplies of the soldiers and provisions to begin the work
have arrived.

By Cedula of May 9th it was again commanded the Viceroy, calling his
special attention to it, that he must aid and supply this Garrison that
it may be in readiness for any emergency which may arrive. By another
Cedula the Governor of Florida was to inform the inhabitants of that
Fort, find out if they had their full quota for its defense, or if they
found it necessary to increase the number on account of the new
settlement of English sixty miles north. How long they had been there,
and if they were sufficiently provided to dislodge the English, which
information must be given so as to provide all and anything that is
necessary. The Governor represented that in the past, the number of
infantry in the Garrison was three hundred in which were included men of
different trades, forty missionary priests without whom the number was
not complete, adding that the total number was three hundred. When the
news of the looting by the English arrived they immediately sent to the
Viceroy of New Spain to send five hundred men to increase the infantry,
appealing to Mexico for more men to complete the number, they replied
that they had sent assistance to other Garrisons where they were
watching and had to have supplies and artillery, so that the War
Department had provided all it could. But to send to Havana and have the
Governor of that Post to act as he had been commanded and send with the
utmost speed the necessary defense for that Garrison. That the Viceroy
had been notified to order the Royal officers of Mexico to increase the
supplies of Florida each year by forty-three recruits, so that there
should never be less than three hundred and ninety in quarters. A Notice
of which was sent the Governor of Florida that he might keep them
informed of its fulfilment. To pay special care and vigilance to the
Province, having it well defended against accident from the enemy
entering, they could instantly banish and punish them. The Governor of
Florida also made known the great want of artillery, having consulted
with the War Department that same date, the War Department ordered the
Viceroy of New Spain and Governor of Havana each to send without delay
two pieces of bronze artillery at the same time they had sent an order
to the contracting house in Sevilla to send other pieces that were in
that City on the first occasion and also the two hundred arms asked for,
that the Garrison may not be without the means of defense and safety. To
keep the infantry under good discipline and that the Governor place
himself in communication with the Viceroy and the Governor of Havana to
see that they send him four pieces of artillery. The Florida Governor
gave an account in this letter also, of having formed a cavalry company
and a military company enlisting in them all who were able, old men and
boys not yet of age, his own sons among them. This he did for the
greater safety of the place against the enemy. He was giving the utmost
zeal and care to his duties. In a letter of 1674 the Sergeant-Major
acting as Governor of the Province of Florida, states that a vessel had
arrived at that Port and they had received four pieces of artillery and
other ammunition from the contracting house in Sevilla, that with this
and the artillery that was to come from Havana and New Spain, these
would be sufficient for the defense of the Garrison. By a dispatch of
1674 thanks were sent the Archbishop, Viceroy, for having sent to
Florida all the supplies due that Garrison. It was sent that it might
leave on the fleet passing Vera Cruz for Spain.

By another dispatch the Governor, Pablo Ita Salazar, was recommended
that he apply himself with much zeal in perfecting the fortification of
the Royal Fort being built in that City and that it be accomplished in a
manner for the best safety of the Province. By Cedula of 1675 the
Sergeant-Major Don Nicolas Ponce de Leon, in reply to a letter of his,
and attentive to an order sent the Governor of Cuba, that if the negro
slaves sent to Havana had not already been sold, he should send
immediately upon their arrival fifty of them to Florida, where they
should be put to work on the Castle under construction. The Indians who
served as peons were not strong and their people were much opposed to
their leaving the planting of corn which is the sustenance of their
families. And the Governor was ordered upon their arrival in Florida to
apply them to this work and relieve the Indians and to finish the
construction as quickly as possible.




CHAPTER XVII.

A. D. 1741-1743.

     _Conduct of the Christians worse than the heathen--Soldiers guarded
     while they are cutting timber to repair the Fort--The Castle in a
     tumble-down condition--The Garrison to be maintained for the
     propagation of the Holy Gospel, and to shelter the workers of the
     Apostolic faith--A paper of representation to his Majesty
     concerning the properties belonging to the Treasurer, Don Francisco
     Menendez, deceased, left by will to the Royal Treasury--The
     pressing need of the Infantry of this Garrison; it having no
     capital, the property should be sold at public auction and proceeds
     go to restore back pay of troops to alleviate suffering, hunger and
     need for clothing, instead of being used for a hospital as per the
     King’s desire--A letter from Governor Manuel Montiano informs his
     Majesty of fourteen English vessels anchored off the Bar of this
     Port--Six Spanish galleys sent to meet them at which the enemy
     retires._


A. D. 1741.

_Sire_:

By the dispatches which, on this occasion, I send you duplicates as well
as the original, you and your Royal and Supreme Council of the Indias
will see the condition of this Port. The continued watch and worry I
have. The continuous watch by day and night of the Infantry to repulse
the hostilities of these enemies. The heathen not being as bad as the
Christians who have risen and commit the most bloody deeds upon all
those whom they catch, carrying off Indians as well as soldiers
prisoners to the Carolinas, where they sell them into bondage. For the
execution of this they have a different set of soldiers stationed at the
terminus of all the roads leading to this Garrison. I am forced to send
out troops on foot and horse to accompany any party going out to fell
and saw timber for the much needed repairs of the ramparts, gather wood,
coal, etc. I began these repairs as soon as I took possession, otherwise
the whole thing would have been demolished and left us with no defense
whatsoever. These repairs cannot last long, for the reasons I have
already repeatedly informed you, and lastly, the great need the Royal
Troops have of rebuilding the ramparts, quarters, warehouses and roofs
that they may stay in at all. To save you such enormous expense as each
day occurs, it will be necessary to fortify the place at once, because
with the English in such close proximity as the Carolinas, this Port is
in the greatest danger of being lost, as the troops are defenseless and
needy as you have been repeatedly informed, and you have given such
stringent orders that the Viceroy should supply all that is needed for
the expulsion of these English, and for which I have done my part far as
possible, as you will see from the consultation I had with him on the
10th of April of this year, an account of which I rendered your Majesty.
Notwithstanding the risk of encountering these enemies, no occasion is
lost of going out to find what is needed and necessary for the
preservation and defense of the Port. Cutting and sawing timber for the
stables and artillery, the most important things--the soliciting of
supplies that we may not be in want as the entire Garrison and
neighborhood depend entirely upon the Royal Warehouses for their
sustenance, as I long ago informed you on the 24th of March. I am hourly
awaiting my successor, to whom I shall give all needed instruction
regarding the defense of this Port from the enemy. I have decided to
surrender as far as possible the execution of the repairs I have
mentioned that he may apply all that he gets to the service of the two
Majesties; that this Garrison may be maintained for the propagation and
extension of the Holy Gospel, as has been done by the good Catholics,
the Kings, your predecessors of a hundred and sixty years, at such
enormous expense with no other interest than to shelter with these arms
the Workers of the Apostolic faith to the greater honor and glory of
God. May He preserve your Majesty.

FRANCISCO CÓRCOLES Y MARTINEZ.

St. Augustine, Fla., December 11th, 1741.


REPRESENTATION.

1743.

The Officers of the Royal Treasury of this Garrison, at the most
convenient time and without prejudice to the definite appeal and
protests made in favor of the same Royal Treasury, represent to your
Highness that in view of this Post having more than seven hundred men,
re-enforcement over and above the troops of its Garrison. That with the
demise of Don Francisco Menendez Marquez, Auditor who was, of these
same Royal Coffers, your Highness has thought that the houses occupied
by him as residence, and all the balance of his property to which he
made the King his sole and only heir, should be dedicated to the use of
hospitals to serve these same troops of the infantry of this Garrison
when occasion offers, on account of the war. Before your Highness
determines to take this step, it becomes indispensable that we should
expose the fact to you that we cannot consent to have the abovementioned
houses assigned to any such uses for the following reasons:

First, because in his will Don Francisco Menendez Marquez himself
declares that, not being able from the balance of his accounts to
satisfy the Royal Treasury, he understood directly that it became
compulsory for him to ease his conscience that he should name the King
his sole and only heir. From this is deduced that all property known as
that of Don Francisco Menendez is, with legitimate title, the property
of the Royal Treasury. Not having the authority to sell these without an
order from your Majesty, it is consistent that we who are his executors
and lack the Royal permit to determine what disposition to make of it
resist the intention and thought your Highness has formed of the use of
the above mentioned houses and balance of property of the aforementioned
gentleman. It seemed to us that in all fairness and justice they should
be closed out at public auction and the proceeds thereof distributed
among the Infantry of this Garrison; because this Garrison has no
capital of its own, it follows that the legitimate creditors to the
property are these same troops. The Royal Treasury is under obligation
to restore to the Infantry the back pay due them, and never better than
now, that they lack clothing and are perishing, should aid come at a
more opportune time, and it could be done with the proceeds of this
property, lessening the obligation of the Royal Treasury that amount.

Second: Your Highness can have no conception of the increased suffering
occasioned by the war. The curing of the wounded soldiers and sailors
who have been in this Post for over two years, there being no capital to
apply to the indispensable expense of medical attendance for this
purpose, it is easy to understand that the situation is burdened by
heavy expenses, and to make it clearer, up to the present date no
provision has been made to cover the cost of the many works of
fortification in this Post and on the bar of Matanzas to defend them
against the continued attacks of our enemy, and for the multitude of
Indians who have attached themselves to us with so much firmness and
friendship, who forgetting us, and the word given to your Highness of
remaining neutral in the actual war between ourselves and the English,
and of the liberality of the King who orders them always to be treated
with so much kindness and affection when they come.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a letter of September 15th of last year we explained to your Majesty
how fourteen English vessels had anchored off the bar of this Port,
coming prepared and perfectly sure they could disembark and take
possession. The six galleys of your Majesty met them, and
notwithstanding their continued firing they made them retire. We await
and naturally expect them to return and try to carry out their
intentions. And therefore, your Majesty’s service is as vigilant as
possible to be on the alert to prevent it. It has been a great pleasure
and satisfaction to us to inform your Majesty of the good results
obtained by the efforts of your six galleys in expelling the enemy. We
are watching closely along the coast of this Province for any other
design they may have of entering. God preserve you.

MANUEL MONTIANO.

El Prado, March 30th, 1743.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A. D. 1770-1771.

     _A letter of resolution to his Majesty in respect to a letter of
     appeal made to the Governor and the Bishop of Havana asking for
     patent and Holy oil to administer baptism and extreme unction to
     the Catholic families taken from the Island of Minorca by the
     English--These families bringing with them one Don Pedro Campos,
     Doctor of Sacred Theology, as a Parish Priest, and Don Bartolome
     Casanovas, of the St. Augustine order, Vicar--These same claiming
     to have received their appointment from the Supreme Pontificate,
     not knowing to which Bishop this jurisdiction of Florida
     belonged--At the end of three years to appear in writing to the
     Prelate of the Apostolic choir of that Diocese--This letter sent
     secretly by a fisherman--In order that a thorough investigation may
     be made, the matter is referred to his Royal Highness--Letter of
     the Archbishop of Valencia concerning same--Letter of the Bishop of
     Cuba to his Majesty, in which he expresses gratification over the
     zeal his Highness has shown concerning this matter--Advises that
     these privileges be conferred upon Dr. Pedro Campos and Pedro
     Casanovas--Letter of the Bishop of Minorca giving information
     concerning the exporting of these families from the Island of
     Minorca by the English._


LETTER OF RESOLUTION.

A. D. 1770.

_Sire_:

By order of his Majesty I sent the Knight of the Order, Fray Don Julian
de Arriaga, with papers of February 27th of this year, to the Governor
of Havana, and documents which treat especially of the appeal made to
the Bishop of that diocese, asking him for patent and Holy oil to
administer baptism and extreme unction to the Catholic families who were
taken from Minorca, to colonize the territory in Florida, belonging to
the English, so that it may be recognized and consulted in the Council
whatever may come up on this subject. The proclaimed Governor Don
Antonio Bucareli y Ursna give an account referring to the above
mentioned documents. He states that he received a letter addressed to
the Bishop of that diocese by one of the passing fish boats on its way
to the northern coast for the fisheries. That immediately upon its
receipt, he made returns of a copy of it, and its entire sentiment,
which he forwarded. From the appearance of its contents, the subject
treated, in their judgment it seemed proper to lay the whole matter
before your Majesty, including a copy of the aforementioned letter, that
you might decide what was most agreeable to your Royal pleasure. In the
already mentioned letter signed it seems by Don Pedro Campos, Doctor of
Sacred Theology, dated from Mosquito on the 20th of October of 1769, the
prelate lays before the public the fact that one year previous Mr.
Andrew Turnbull, an Englishman, had taken from the Island of Minorca
about 1300 persons to colonize Florida, for whom he was appointed
Parish Priest and Don Bartolome Casanovas, of the St. Augustine order,
Vicar of said jurisdiction. They had received their appointment from the
Supreme Pontificate, not knowing to which Bishop this jurisdiction of
Florida belonged, but it was their duty to appear by writing before the
expiration of three years to the Prelate of the Apostolic chair in that
diocese. That both of them are natives of Minorca, which Island was
temporarily subject to the King of Great Britain and spiritually to the
Bishop of Minorca. That he had studied philosophy and theology, received
all the orders, been one of the governing body and Vicar. This last
office he had held for twelve years in Minorca. Preached during several
Lents, as had also Padre Casanovas. For all these reasons he begs that
he be sent a patent of Parochial Priest and one of Vicar to Fray
Casanovas. He also asks for some of the Holy Oil used in baptism and
extreme unction. That all these be sent him by the same secret means of
the fishermen for the spiritual aid and advancement of those Catholic
people.

Successively the same Knight of the Order sent another paper and
testimony to the Bishop of Cuba, Don Santiago Echevarria, saying that
the dispatch or expedient sent belonged to the Council. With the order
of February 27th referring to the solicitude felt by that Vicar and
Parish Priest for the families who had been transported from Minorca, so
that they might be united to this tribunal which could proceed to
recognize them as stated in the prepared information. In it the same
prelate, Don Julian Arriaga, of the diocese, states that at the same
time he had full knowledge of the letter of Dr. Campos, the Governor
passed a bill considering it not worthy of his consideration and not
recognizing the legitimacy of the letter of the pretendent nor his
pontifical jurisdiction. Affirming that the testimony was of little
value or belief. The simple say so of a letter. The class of foreigners
who lived among heretics, diminished their estimation of the Holy Oil,
finally that he considered it absolutely necessary to lay the whole
matter before your Majesty. Considering each clause of the letter, he
deemed that it should be answered by the minister, arranging all
according to his judgment and resolution to be made known, so that
hereafter he may know how to proceed in similar cases. The Council, in
view of the referred report, placed it before the Judge, whose original
answer is in the hands of your Royal Highness confirming the opinion it
contains and placing before your Royal consideration that the judgment
found by the Bishop of Cuba has been very prudent, that he has worked
with wise precaution, because truly the contents of Dr. Campos’ letter
are very delicate, and one should be cautious in being influenced by a
weak letter entrusted to uncertain fishermen. That at all events it
lacks the necessary antecedents required for an affair of less
importance. That the foundation should be the legitimizing of the
persons referred to by the Priest and the Fray Casanovas. The claims
with which they passed to Florida in company with the families from
Minorca and the jurisdiction they assure us to have received from the
Supreme Pontificate. Nothing of this has been sent in document form, nor
promised to be sent in such form, ignoring also whether the families
from said Island taken out by the English were Catholics, and if they
had passed into Florida as such and with the freedom of enforcing their
religion. That Catholics, permanent residents of Florida, should ask
spiritual aid of the Bishop of Cuba, is perfectly proper, because,
before the occupation of the English, Mosquito was under his
jurisdiction. Neither should sacred things be exposed to the scorn and
ridicule of heretics, nor should it be badly administered. The secret
manner in which Dr. Campos seeks this aid, so very queer, because if the
families from Minorca are Catholic and were transported as such to
Florida with the free privilege of their religion, as is seen by their
efforts in bringing with them a Parish Priest and Vicar. The English
would certainly not oppose them in publicly asking for and having all
that is required by these same Catholics for administering the
sacraments, education of the masses, and spiritual good of their souls.
All this makes it indispensable that we should have a thorough knowledge
and investigation of these affairs by other means before we can decide
on this matter with any certainty. To which is added that by the article
eleven of the Treaty of Peace adjusted on the 13th of July of the year
1713, in which was ceded to the crown of Great Britain the Island of
Minorca, (among other things) promised by his British Majesty was that
the inhabitants of the said Island should enjoy in all safety and
peacefulness all the honors and privileges of the Roman Catholic
religion, and also that for the preservation of this religion they
should take all measures which did not appear exposed to the Government
of Sevilla and laws of Great Britain. Thus it seems to the Council that
your Minister in Rome should be appointed to investigate the matter
with the greatest solicitude, because if the Catholics of the above
mentioned Island of Minorca, transported by the English in the year 1768
(as we deduce from Dr. Campos’ letter), have made an appeal to the
Apostolic Secretary in order to carry with them their own Pastor, and if
his Holiness has named in the capacity of the Parish Priest and Vicar
the referred to Don Pedro Campos and Don Bartolome Casanovas of the St.
Augustine Order, and such jurisdiction assigned to them.

Being informed as briefly and clearly as possible, extend an order to
the Captain-General of the Island of Minorca and to the Bishop of that
Diocese that they may separately inform if they know of the exportation
of the families of Minorca by the English to populate Florida. If the
declared families were Catholic, and if the Prelates lived and behaved
as priests; if they passed over here with the understanding that they
had free use of their religion, if Dr. Campos and Pedro Casanova were
elected as Parish Priest and Vicar of them. What is the character and
circumstances of these two subjects, and if on accepting they gave
notice and obtained permission of that minister and that prelate. In the
meanwhile if the steps have been taken, it is imperative that the
Governor of Havana and the Bishop of Cuba be given to understand that
the prudent steps taken by them was exactly and perfectly agreeable to
your Majesty. Their determination and your agreeing with it perfectly as
though they had anticipated your resolution on the present subject. That
without appearing in it, the Bishop should try by all means available to
investigate the manner of practising the Catholic religion by these
Minorcans in Florida. The position of Dr. Campos and Fray Casanovas who
are supposed to be Parish Priest and Vicar of the Catholic portion of
the settlement. Let a similar order be given the Governor so as to
advance as speedily as possible with the news, giving information of the
results of the search that your Majesty may decide on what is most
agreeable to your Royal Highness.

Madrid, Sept. 27th, 1770.


LETTER OF THE ARCHBISHOP OF VALENCIA.

_My Dear Sir_:

Having formed the corresponding petition, begging for an extension of
the privileges granted Don Pedro Campos and Pedro Bartolome Casanovas, I
also asked the Pope in the name of his Royal Majesty to grant these
ministers all privileges in their spiritual management, as requested by
his Majesty.

Your Lordship notified me as seems quite proper the time to investigate
concerning these privileges, he being one of the supervisors at the
tribunal of the Holy Office, he immediately accomplished what was asked
by sending to his Holiness at the instigation of Monseñor Autoville,
Assessor of said Tribunal, who spoke favorably of helping them with his
influence, as he did, and you will see by the enclosed letter of
Saturday sent by Señor Zelada. He informs me that his Holiness extends
to them the privileges for a term of twenty years and inquires of me if
I have attended to the balance of the communications soliciting greater
privileges for these Ecclesiastics, enclosing for my instruction the
printed pamphlet of privileges granted the Bishop of Cuba, where he
facilitates the authentic open mandate. Seeming to me to be agreeable
and satisfactory to the King, I replied that he should ask these
privileges and notify me, as he has done, and which I send you, hoping
they will deserve your approval and the pleasure of his Majesty. I take
this occasion of placing myself at your disposal, and may God grant you
a long life is the wish of

THE BISHOP OF VALENCIA.

Trascati, August 28th, 1771.


LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF CUBA.

_Sire_:

I have had the honor of receiving the Royal Cedule of your Majesty dated
in Idelfonso 16th of August, of this year, in reply to my letter of
February 19th. You condescend to enclose me a copy of what the Rev.
Bishop of Minorca has written regarding the Catholic families who were
taken from Minorca to establish themselves in the English territory of
Florida, called Mosquito, and a literal copy of the privileges granted
by the Apostolic See to the Parish Priest and Vicar of them.

You order me that in the use of peculiar privileges and delegated in
consequence of the subordination under which these Presbyters declare
themselves. I should grant them the titles they ask of parochial and
assistant in the most approved form under the present state of
affairs--to furnish them with the Holy Oil as long as there should be no
reason for withholding it, and take entire care of those faithful,
governing them by means of these ministers, and taking as many
precautions as I consider proper to the preservation of the faith,
availing myself in case of need of the Governor and Captain-General of
this Island. Your Majesty advises me of the official letters addressed
by the Secretary of State to the Court of London, representing clearly
what was said by the Bishop of Minorca, and also the result of the
solicitation which by your order has aided the Rev. Archbishop of
Valencia with his Holiness, in obtaining from him an extension of the
privileges granted these Ecclesiastics extend even beyond mine--and it
is well and needed for the spiritual good of this Catholic portion. Have
the goodness to permit me to express the sweet commotion my soul has
felt at seeing the proper zeal on the part of your Majesty, and the
interest you take in extending the Kingdom of Christ over all the world.
This example must influence the Pastors, as we have the honor of
rendering homage to so great and Catholic a Monarch.

As to the instructions of your Sovereign Majesty that I should
communicate your resolutions to the Marquez de la Torre, the new
Governor and Captain-General of this city and Island, I did not have to
encourage his zeal in the affair. Full of the greatest energy in the
service of God and your Majesty, he immediately fitted up a vessel
which, under the pretext of fishing along the coast of Florida, should
approach Mosquito Inlet and deliver to Dr. Pedro Campos, through safe
hands, the two titles, for himself that of Parish Priest and Vicar for
his companion, Pedro Casanovas--a delegation of various privileges I
have considered advisable for the spiritual good of that Diocese under
its dangerous constitution. A casket containing three vessels of the
Holy Oil needed, and two assistants for the divine worship, all of which
I offer up to the service of God.

These documents I place at the foot of your throne. By them you will see
how I have written to these Ministers inspiring them with a spirit of
gratitude. I encourage and sustain them to carry out their good
enterprise, exacting a report under pretext of aiding them in their
spiritual emergencies. The moment I obtain them I shall send to your
Majesty all the light I obtain on the subject. I shall be on the lookout
to consult the books used by these Religious men, and aid them in all
that is needed for the reasonable administration of the sacraments and
health of their souls. Judging by the measures I have taken of their
delegation they will scarcely need the extension of the first words of
the Holy Chair. On the arrival of these, I shall take other means more
suitable to these circumstances, and in all shall try to carry out the
real intentions your Majesty has deemed proper to state to me and
nothing will be more gratifying than to ascertain them through my
fidelity to God, who I hope will preserve you for many years.

Havana, December 14th, 1771.


LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF MINORCA.

_My Dear Sir_:

On date of October 27th just passed and by order of your Majesty, on the
occasion of a representation made you by common accord by the Bishop and
Governor of Havana, I was commissioned by Don Tomas Melio, predecessor
of your Majesty’s, to give any information I could regarding the
exporting of the families from the Island of Minorca by the English to
colonize Florida. If these families were Catholics and if Dr. Pedro
Campos and Padre Bartolome Casanovas, who accompanied them, had been
elected for that purpose, their character and circumstances and if for
the acceptance of this commission they notified me and obtained my
license.

It seems suitable to my ministry to give a categorical reply to what has
been asked, the impediments imposed on my jurisdiction by the Governor
of said Island when the exportation was carried into effect, with me to
the extent of opening my private letters, suspecting others might be
enclosed in them for me. This deprived me of all news regarding the
exportation, which by means of some who came from said Islands brought
me news of my Vicar-General by word of mouth, it being impossible to
write under the circumstances, that the families were all Catholics and
passed over with the free use of their religion having accompanied them
two Ecclesiastics to serve as Parochial Priests, and I am persuaded they
were the same who gave rise to the representation. During the opposition
of that Governor to the exercise of my authority I many times resorted
to carry from the Island to the Court, to men who were worthy to protect
the benignity of our Catholic religion with messages to your Ambassador
at the Court and at my instigation they were placed at your Royal feet
by the Marquez of Grimalde with whose powerful help and meditation we
finally obtained a hearing of the private Council of the King of Great
Britain which took place on last June, when a Decree was sent stating
that no state, and I have placed myself in communication with the Vicar
to whom I have written that without loss of time he informed me of all
that had occurred in the exportation, how executed, the circumstances of
the two Ecclesiastics and if they went with this permission, and all
else conducive to a satisfactory reply. This I will fulfill immediately
I receive a reply. In the meantime the exportation being undoubtedly
public and notorious, also that it was occasioned by the want and
suffering endured in that Island by many families on account of poor
crops for several consecutive years which obliged me to grant
dispensation from the eating of lactenacious food and meat on prohibited
days. Most of the families who went to Florida had come to this Island
to colonize the unhappy city of Aludia, and if I rightly understand, I
do not doubt but that some went to Cierra Morena or other places in
Spain, from the manner in which the Vicar-General communicated to me the
exportation, I doubt if the Ecclesiastics went with his permission, he
would only have allowed and tolerated it for the good of the religion
and not to irritate the Governor more by reports which, when I first
arrived on this Island, he gave me of all the Ecclesiastics. It results
that Dr. Campos was a good and laborious Priest, devoted strictly to his
ministerial duties, and had been Vicar for some years. That he was Vicar
of a village of that Island. This is confirmed by several persons of
Minorca who, in this unsettled state, are still here, and although some
of the clergy do not give such good reports, those they have given of
his conduct are not bad, but being obliged to state all that I
understood in this city regarding the exportation, I am assured by
several persons that bad news is being spread of the unhappiness in
which these families live, their disgust with the country where there is
nothing but hard labor and want, in place of the happiness and riches
they had been promised by the English, and what is worse, that they
themselves (without stating the reason) had assassinated the said
Clergyman who had accompanied them. This is all I can tell you at
present, until I have a reply for the worse from my Vicar-General of
Minorca. In the meantime I take this occasion to congratulate your
Majesty upon your new destiny and after my services praying God may
grant you long life.

BISHOP OF MINORCA.

Palma, February 5th, 1771.




CHAPTER XIX.

A. D. 1771.

     _The opinion of the Judge, after having examined the different
     letters from the Bishops and those in authority connected therewith
     and after making thorough investigation into this matter concerning
     the granting of the patent and graces asked for by these Priests of
     the Minorcan families of the English colony of Florida--The Bishop
     of Cuba for the Council to Dr. Don Pedro Campos and the Rev. Father
     Bartolome Casanovas, extends to these Priests the title of Parish
     Priest and Vicar--Also sends a box containing three flasks of
     Sacred Oil--Hopes soon to be able to send a more extended
     prorogation of other powers--This grace having been solicited by
     the King from the Court of Rome--Asks for a more extended report of
     the number of families and condition of the congregation._


The Judge has seen a letter of the Rev. Archbishop of Valencia, Minister
of his Majesty, in the Court of Rome, dated Dec. 13th of the last year,
in which replying to another of Nov. 3rd by the Secretary of State, he
informs him of some indulgences and privileges granted by the Apostolic
See to Dr. Pedro Campos, secular priest, and to Father Bartolome
Casanovas of the St. Augustine Order, who accompanied the Catholic
families of Minorca in the year 1768 selected by the English for their
colony in Florida in America. He has also seen another letter from the
Rev. Bishop of Minorca of the 5th of February last, who informs him that
by Royal Cedula of November 7th of the past year, he has been asked
regarding the manner practised in the selection of the families of
Minorca and the circumstances of said prelates; he gives all the
information he knows and can at present, promising that immediately upon
receipt of news he expects and has asked for he will forward. Lastly
that he has investigated and informed himself of the Royal order of the
1st of the present March by which these letters have passed to the
Council, that they may agree in the provisions they deem worthy and
advisable. For the better understanding of all this affair it must be
remembered that the Governor of Havana, Don Antonio Bucareli, gave an
account on the 11th of January of the referred to year, of the arrival
of another certificate of the virtues of one for Beatification, directed
to the Rev. Bishop and seemingly written by Dr. Pedro Campos who calls
himself Parish Priest of the families of Minorca who were selected by
the English for their colony of Florida; that this letter had been put
in the hands of the Diocesan Prelate; that one and the other had
notified his Majesty of the difficulties surrounding the request and
proposition of Dr. Campos, as has been demonstrated by the antecedent
documents. It is also worthy of consideration that Dr. Campos in his
letter at the same time that he states the selection and transmigration
of the Minorcans to Florida participates that he had been elected Parish
Priest of said families, and Father Casanovas, Vicar of them, which
jurisdiction they had received from the Supreme Pontificate who ignored
to which Bishop they were subject in that English colony; but placing
them under obligation to appear by writing before the expiration of
three years to the Holy See and the Diocesan Prelate that one and the
other were natives of Minorca, subject under the temporal power to Great
Britain and spiritually to the Bishop of Minorca, both having exercised
for many years the position of priests in preaching the Gospel and moral
doctrines. And for this reason they begged the Rev. Bishop of Cuba to
send them patents of Parish Priest and Vicar for Father Casanovas, as
also the Holy Oil for baptism and extreme unction, and two assistant
priests, proceeding with circumspection and secrecy and taking advantage
of the fishermen of that coast, being all the inducement required for
the help and benefit of the spiritual good of the Catholics. The Rev.
Bishop of Cuba, considering the grave importance of the matter,
refrained from replying to Dr. Campos, being ignorant of the quality and
jurisdiction of his authority, and not to expose to irreverence the
sacred matter of the Holy Oil, sending it to a Protestant Colony, and
not knowing the person nor authority he had for exercising the place of
Parish Priest, especially as the letter had not come in a legitimate
way; but by the uncertain conduct of fishermen entrusted with the secret
of an affair which did not seem to require this means, as there was
liberty of religion observed in the English Colony, and as the Minorcans
reserved the right to practise the Catholic religion.

The Judge, in view of all this, adopts the idea of the Rev. Bishop of
Cuba, and approves his prudent resolution, and was of the opinion that
this matter be illustrated by investigation, as to whether it was true
that this authority was granted by the Apostolic See, to the Prelates
Campos and Casanovas--and under what terms and considerations. What
subjects they were, if they had been appointed by the Diocesan of
Minorca, if they were of good habits, and if the Minorcans were
Catholics. If under these terms they had come to Florida with the view
of carrying out the necessary orders of the Prelate and Governor of
Minorca, and the Minister of your Majesty in the Court of Rome. All of
which was accomplished, this being the antecedent which gives motive to
the reply of the letters which have remained so long unanswered. The
Minister of Rome gives information that in the month of June of 1768
were deputised as Apostolic missionaries for the English Province of
Florida, the aforementioned Dr. Campos and Father Casanovas, this last
as Vicar for the Minorcan families who asked of the Apostolic See, that
different authority should be granted these Prelates for the term of
three years, and in the meantime permission of his Holiness, according
to terms which result by a simple copy which will accompany their
letter. This Minister adds to have stated to his Holiness that if it
were agreeable to His Majesty that this authority be promulgated and
privileges granted that his only object was to please and serve the
Catholic King.

The Apostolic indulgences being examined, it results that they were
reduced to six: administering the sacraments, asking permission of the
Bishop, and under the same condition the authority in all hidden cases
of granting dispensation to the poor, for contracting matrimony, to
erect churches and chapels--all these must be exercised without pay for
the term of three years, in the meantime with the approbation of the
Apostolic See. The Rev. Bishop of Minorca says: that he cannot furnish
the information asked of him until he obtains news of his Vicar-General
of Minorca, who has not been able to execute it by writing, but he
assures us that these Prelates and all the Minorcan families were
Catholics and passed to Florida carrying with them two Ecclesiastics who
might be the said Campos and Casanovas. The Judge, with reference to
all, considers that he has discovered sufficient truth to assuage the
just fears of the Rev. Bishop of Cuba, to the recourse to the Apostolic
See, by the Minorcan families or of the Prelates Campos and Casanovas
and the authority granted to these by his Holiness. The application for
help of Dr. Campos dispels all doubt which might arise from the distance
between Florida and the Island of Cuba. From all this result other
useful things, since all this authority granted Dr. Campos and Father
Casanovas is left at the disposal of the Bishop of Cuba and as this
Prelate and to all those of America so many pontifical authorities are
granted, he can very well make use of it for the spiritual government of
the little flock of Catholics residing in the English Colony and examine
the privileges granted to these Presbyters, adopting them according to
the nature and delegate of the authority of their Pastoral Office. It is
true that the secrecy asked by Dr. Campos caused some misgivings, but in
view of what it expounded by the Rev. Bishop of Minorca the mystery is
solved, as perhaps it has happened in Florida as in Minorca and Minorca
in regard to the disturbances of the Catholic religion, the English
having been wanting in their promises drawn up in their agreement. So
that, as the Vicar-General of Minorca had no expedient in his
jurisdiction, the same may have happened to Dr. Campos and Father
Casanovas who, in consequence of the determination of the Court of
London, cannot proceed in all concerning the education and spiritual
care of the Catholics.

Under these considerations the Judge feels that the Rev. Bishop of Cuba
should send him a copy of all that he wishes, sharing with him the care
of the faithful of Florida, governing them by means of the
aforementioned ministers and taking as much forethought as his zeal
dictates and he considers convenient to a good government and conversion
of that Catholic portion, availing themselves of the necessary form of
Governor of Havana and Captain-General of that Island of Cuba, not only
for having been the means of which Dr. Campos availed himself, but also
that he may communicate with the Governor and Chief of Florida, and that
the Rev. Bishop of Minorca send him notice of his letter and beg him to
take charge and investigate such reports as may come up, informing
himself through the Vicar-General of Minorca and also of those Catholic
subjects who from said Island have passed to the city of Alzuvia as we
are assured in his letter. That the Commandant of Minorca be stimulated
anew to obtain the information demanded of him. And that he send
documents to the Marquez of Gremaldin to the effect that he send notice
to the Council of the church service, which by the Secretary in charge
has been made in the Courts of London at the instance of the clergy and
Bishop of Minorca, and of the resolution taken by the Council, provided
by the King of Great Britain. These documents being necessary, to send a
copy to the Governor and Bishop of Cuba that they may proceed securely
and provide such resources as are needed, for all of which they can free
themselves with necessary speed. Notwithstanding the Council will
remember what is most agreeable.

Madrid, April 16th, 1771.


FOR THE COUNCIL.

A. D. 1771.

_My Dear Sir_:

I have not forgotten your Excellency’s letter of Oct. 20th of 1768, in
which you state to me your merits and occupation as also that of Father
Bartolome Casanovas of the St. Augustine Order, and you expound to me
the motives which induce you to apply to me for your title of Parish
Priest of the Catholic families of Minorcans established in Mosquito,
English territory of Florida, and that of Vicar for the other Priest.
Also asking for the Sacred Oils with which to administer baptism and
extreme unction, and for two assistant Priests of the Divine office. In
order that I might reply to your claims I considered it advisable to
submit it to the higher authority and intelligence of the King, my Lord,
and that I might be enlightened by his Sovereign order regarding all
requirements for so delicate and serious a subject. I have received all
the light on the subject I wished through a Royal Cedula of Aug. 16th of
the present year, composed of documents which legitimatize the
character of your executive and that of your companion. The power and
authority invested in you by the Holy See and the professed Catholicism
of the Minorcan families to whom you both administer. Also the various
instructions all relative to my government in that Catholic Colony whose
obedience and prompt attention to the kind intentions of the King our
Sovereign, I extend to you (by means of a safe and trusty guide) the
title of Parish Priest and Vicar. A copy containing the only and
extraordinary powers of the Apostolic Chair, which I hold and which I
convey to your Excellency and by your death, sickness or other
legitimate impediment, to your companion. That the time with the
requirements expressed therein, two assistant priests of the Divine
office and a box with three flasks of sacred oil, distinguished as the
Chrisma, Catecuma, and for the sick. I hope soon to send you a more
extended prorogation of other powers, that you may make good use of them
to the benefit of that small flock, and in case of you and your
companion’s death, the Priest I should nominate. This is a grace that
the Catholic and clement heart of the King has solicited from the Court
of Rome, through the means of his Minister. It is also reserved that I
shall be promptly advised of the results of the Offices made in the
court of London, by order or representation of the Illustrious Bishop of
Minorca, and the resolutions taken by the private council of the King of
Great Britain in the month of June of the past year, with the only
desire that their people do not become discouraged in the Holy Religion
they profess, and that they owe such great blessings to the best of
Monarchs whose large soul guides all his thoughts and intentions to the
sustenance and propagation of the true Roman Faith, making it noticed
and perceived by the whole world his pious and eminent care for humanity
and his heroic and glorious zeal. Your Excellency will make it
understood by those chosen few, the gratitude and acknowledgment these
sublime demonstrations bind them to fulfill. Apply yourself to guide
them and make them patient with all love and charity. Apply yourself to
all this and count on my assistance in all that is needed to secure this
important work. That I may better form an idea of your wants and desires
to relieve them with the spiritual aid that your condition requires, it
would be well you should send me immediately an individual report of the
constitution, material and formula of your church and a list of the
families who compose your congregation. State all excesses, and anything
you deem worthy of my consideration and within my Province. These last
will always have for their object the salvation of the souls confided to
the good conscience and care of your Excellency and your companion,
whose good conduct I flatter myself leaves nothing to desire, being
perfect and complete in the discharge of his respective ministerial
duties to the honor and glory of God. These are of such interest that we
are obliged to sacrifice our best efforts, the repose and even loss of
our own lives. I remain with best wishes and always ready to conciliate
your wishes. May God guide you for many happy years.

I kiss your hand and am your affectionate and sincere Chaplain,

THE BISHOP OF CUBA.

Señor Dr. Don Pedro Campos (absent).

Rev. Father Bartolome Casanovas.

It agrees with the original letter and its contents, which remain in the
Secretary under my charge and which I remit by order of the Bishop, my
Lord. I took this out in Havana on the 3rd day of December, 1771.

DR. JOSE DE LA BANDERA, Secretary.




CHAPTER XX.

A. D. 1773.

     _Proceedings of the Council upon information obtained from his
     Majesty’s Minister at the Court of Rome concerning the appeal made
     by the Parish Priest and Vicar of the Catholic families established
     in the English territory of Florida--The matter contained in the
     different Bishops’ letters, also the letters of the Priest and
     Vicar asking for patent and further privileges rehearsed--A report
     of the condition of the said Minorcan families who are dissatisfied
     with the lack of spiritual comforts--Have built a brick church and
     are very devout--Of their desire to throw off the yoke of Great
     Britain and their love for Spain--Reply of the Judge--Testimony
     sent by the Bishop of Cuba._


COUNCIL.

Report relative to information obtained from His Majesty’s minister at
the Court of Rome in reply to the order expedited as a result of the
appeal made by the Parish Priest and Vicar of the Catholic families
established in the English territory of Florida, to the Bishop of Cuba,
asking for the Holy Oil.


PROCEEDINGS.

First--In Council on September 27th of last year, it was called to your
Royal attention in Council, what had been represented by the Governor of
Havana and Rev. Bishop of Cuba, concerning the appeal made to the
Bishop of Cuba by Dr. Pedro Campos and Padre Bartolome Casanovas, the
first Parish Priest, the second Vicar of the Catholic families who were
taken from Minorca to colonize the territory of Florida, belonging to
the English, asking for the Holy Oil, with which to administer baptism.
It seemed that your Majesty’s Minister in the Court of Rome was the most
worthy person to solicit and obtain with promptness the information as
to whether the Catholics taken from the Island of Minorca by the English
in the year 1768, had made an appeal to the Holy See that they might
carry with them their own Pastors, and if his Holiness had named in the
capacity of Parish or Parochial Priest and Vicar of the referred to
people, the Presbyters Dr. Campos and Padre Bartolome Casanovas, and
what jurisdiction had been conceded to them, giving all information with
the greatest clearness; also, that the correspondence and letter be
expedited to the Captain-General of the Island of Minorca and the Bishop
of that Diocese that they should inform separately all details they knew
of the extraction of the families of Minorca made by the English to
colonize Florida, if said families were Catholics and lived and behaved
as such. If they went over with the privilege of the free use of their
religion, and if Dr. Campos and Padre Casanovas were elected Parish
Priest and Vicar of them. What was the character of these two Subjects,
and if for the acceptance of this charge they gave notice and obtained
permission from that Minister. In the meantime, while such steps are
being taken, that they should acknowledge to the Governor of Havana and
Bishop of Cuba, the receipt of their letters stating it to have been to
the Royal approval of your Majesty the determination they had agreed
upon--notifying each that your Majesty would take some action in the
matter, but that the Bishop should try to inform himself of the manner
of practising the Catholic religion by these Minorcans in Florida, and
the manner of assistance by the Parish Priest and Vicar of the Catholic
Town and that the same be forwarded to the Governor, so that one and the
other advance the information resulting therefrom. And your Majesty
having agreed in this opinion should order the corresponding Royal
Cedulas and letters agreed upon with date of October 27th and November
7th of last year.


FINAL CONDITION.

In this condition the Council received a letter from the Rev. Bishop of
Minorca of February 5th of this year, stating that he could not take the
required steps for obtaining information asked, as he awaited news of
his Vicar-General of Minorca, who had sent him some messages by word of
mouth, not being able to do so by writing on account of the interference
of the Governor of that Island. Notwithstanding the difficulties the
Vicar had communicated to him the fact that all the families were
Catholics who went to Florida with the free use of their religion,
carrying with them, to serve as Parish Priest and Vicar, two
Ecclesiastics, one secular and one monastic (belonging to an order), and
they might be the ones mentioned. This Prelate adding that the first was
a good and laborious Priest, applying himself strictly to his
Ministerial duties, and had been Vicar for many years on that Island.
That of the other he did not have such good reports, although those he
had were not so bad. That it was reported the English had assassinated
this Priest without stating a reason for doing so. That last June, on
account of the troubles between this Court and the Court of London, a
decree was obtained from the private Council of the King of Great
Britain that in Minorca there should be no further interference with the
Ecclesiastics; that now a more quiet state exists and things are
restored to their normal state, therefore the Rev. Bishop awaited news
of the matter from his Vicar, having asked for it last October 27th.

Prior to this Fray Julian Ariaga had sent a document, dated March 1st of
the present year, written upon the resolution of your Majesty, expressed
in a letter notifying your Minister at the Court of Rome, who having
verified and accomplished the same the accompanying note, showing the
powers and privileges invested in Dr. Campos and Padre Casanovas. These
documents are sent by order of his Majesty to the Council, that upon
seeing them they may agree upon the provisions most expedient. In this
letter the Minister of your Majesty in Rome states that in the month of
June of 1768 they were empowered as Apostolic Missionaries for the
English Province of Florida. The Minorcan families had petitioned the
Holy See to invest these Prelates with certain powers, which was done,
granting them these powers for a term of three years, in the meantime a
Permit of His Holiness accompanied it set forth in these terms, as shown
by the copy--if it should be agreeable to your Majesty that they make
use of these powers and privileges--that he was only too glad and
willing to serve and please so good and Catholic a King.

From the above mentioned letter of indulgences, it appears that they are
six, reduced to the administering of the Parochial Sacraments, obtaining
first permission from the Bishop or his Vicar. These places are near,
not further than two days’ journey of ten leagues each day by land from
the Province of Florida, and under the same conditions these Priests are
invested with the power of absolving abroad all such hidden cases,
although it be reserved for the Holy See to give dispensation to the
poor, where they wish to contract matrimony within certain degrees of
kinship. Some of these privileges of dispensation are granted to some
Priests approved by their Bishop. They could construct churches and
chapels in the Colony under the same restrictions of getting a permit
from the Diocesan Bishop, if not absent and at too great a distance.
These privileges were to be exercised in a gracious manner for only
three years, in the meantime under permit of the Holy See. The Council
of March 4th of this year, having agreed that this expedient be
transferred to the Judge with the former proceedings. In his reply of
August 16th is the following. With regard to all that is stated he says:
that he discovers ample reasons to quiet the mind and anxieties
indicated by the Bishop of Cuba, as it is evident the Minorcan families
obtain direct permission from the Holy See granting these powers to Dr.
Campos and Padre Casanovas--leaving them, however, subordinates to the
Diocesan Bishop while he was not at too great a distance. That the
proceedings of Dr. Campos remove all doubt which might arise of the
distance of the Bishop, as this Presbyter recognizes him as his own and
proper Pastor. From this the Judge decides that the Bishop of Cuba can
grant, without any further fear, the requests of Dr. Campos; that he
should contribute to it, not alone for the consolation it would bring
those Catholic families, but also to confirm and establish his
jurisdiction, and have it under his control in all things concerning the
Faith. Under these terms occur many others which are useful, as the
privileges are granted these Ecclesiastics, but places them legally
under control of the Bishop of Cuba. And as to this Prelate, as well as
to all those in America, such ample privileges are granted, he might
well avail himself of them for the spiritual government of the flock of
Catholics residing in the English Colony. He could examine the
privileges conceded and interpret them as the new ones of his Pastoral
Office. It is true that the caution and secrecy used by Dr. Campos
caused some anxiety and suspicion, but in view of what the Rev. Bishop
of Minorca says, the mystery is discovered, supposing that the same
circumstances had arisen in Florida as in Minorca, and there had been
religious disturbances, or that the English had failed to comply with
the treaties of the capitulation. That as the Vicar-General of Minorca
was prevented from carrying on his correspondence with the Diocese of
Minorca, the same might have occurred with Dr. Campos, owing to the
proceedings at the Court of London he could have no intercourse with any
other Diocese. That aside from these considerations, which are to be
regretted, the Judge considers it well for the Bishop of Cuba to retain
a copy with all the particulars given by the Bishop of Minorca,
referring to the good standing of the Catholics who emigrated to the
English Colony, and that the high standing of Dr. Campos and Padre
Casanovas and send a literal copy of the privileges granted to them by
the Apostolic See, omitting the expression used in the summary of the
“Bula de la Cena.” But that the Bishop make use of all the privileges
granted him, and expedite the titles of Parochial Pastor and Vicar which
have been asked of him in such terms as are best suited for the present,
and send them the Holy Oils, if nothing new should arise to prevent it.
So care for the faithful of Florida and govern them by means of these
same Ministers--using all the zeal and care he considers good for
them--making use of the Governor of Havana and the Captain-General if
necessary. Not only that he was the means used by Dr. Campos for
obtaining these concessions, but that documents may be passed between
himself and the Governor of Florida, he should have the Bishop of
Minorca to acknowledge receipt of his letter, and beg him to verify the
reports and information given by the Vicar-General of Minorca of those
Catholic subjects who passed from the City of Alusia (Alcubea) as he
assures us in his letter. That the commandant of Minorca make it
obligatory that he give this information asked, and that an official
report be made of it and sent to the Marquis of Grimaldi that he in turn
may report it to the Council as his individual report of what the
secretary under his charge has done in the Court of London at the
representation of the Clergy and Bishop of Minorca and the resolution
taken by the private Council of the King of Great Britain in the month
of June of the past year, as affirmed by the same Bishop. These
documents are necessary according as what may be produced or forwarded
by the Governor or Bishop of Cuba, so as to proceed with security and
remit to the Ministers of Florida the necessary resources and forward
categorical documents if found necessary. By means of these dispatches
and letters all things may be facilitated.


NOTE.

This expedient being ready for the Councils, two letters have been
received, one from the proclaimed Bishop of Minorca and the other from
the Commandant of that Island, Marques de Alos, both dated April 22nd of
the present year. The first states that in consequence of what he spoke
of in his preceding letter of February 5th, that an account of the
troubles on the Island of Minorca in trying to open war with this Court,
His Vicar-General who resides there did not dare to answer His letter of
December 14th past, regarding the various families who had passed into
Florida. That only by a note, without his signature, did he intimate
that this Priest had the title of Prelate and the power to confess and
preach. That he was a person of merit, capacity and virtue. That the
Monk who accompanied him had the license and power to preach and hear
confessions; that immediately after the publication of peace he heard
from the same Vicar, who after writing of several affairs corresponding
to his ministerial duties, He states that from his Parish alone on
account of the great suffering from failures of crops, there had gone to
Florida with others from that Island and Spain, more than three hundred
families. They were urged by insinuations from the Government who
offered them homes, with land to cultivate and hold and the free use of
their Catholic religion, adding these remarks regarding the proclaimed
Priests: Dr. Campos, who had served as Vicar and Parish Priest in the
Parish of Mercadal, had asked him for letters and testimonials to pass
over to Florida, which he granted and in them stated the good character
He bore and exemplary life He had led and good work he had done for the
Church, having served many years as Vicar and being well versed in
literature. The St. Augustine Monk who accompanied Him was Padre
Bartolome Casanovas; he found nothing wrong in His conduct; He had
preached in the Parish of Alazor and was consequently the Confessor of
men; he did not remember more. He concludes his letter stating that this
is about all He can say on the subject. The Commandant, Marques de Alos,
in His letter stated that He had not been able sooner to make the
necessary inquiries and comply with the order on account of the
differences between this Court and that of London, but that things
having quieted he has been able to ascertain that the transmigration of
these families was made by the offer of lands to cultivate and retain
with the free use of their Catholic Religion as practised by the
Minorcans of that Island, according to the treaty between both Courts.
That Dr. Campos was assistant Parish Priest of Mercadal--a Priest of
exemplary life and habits, taking with Him his credentials from the
Vicar of the Diocese in Mahon. It was supposed that the Augustine Monk
went also with permission of his Superior, but of that nothing certain
was obtained, as that portion of the Island of Minorca was under the
dominion of Great Britain, and only the Ecclesiastics recognized the
superiority of the Bishop of that Diocese--this was all he could certify
in obedience to the command received. Later a letter came from the
Bishop of Cuba, dated February 19th; on the same subject in response to
the order sent by Royal Cedula of November 7th, he says: That having
devoted himself to find out, with every precaution, he was able to
obtain the following information from one of the fishermen who has been
in the Catholic Minorcan settlement. That these families are established
in their homes, the house of Dr. Campos and Padre Casanovas being the
principal one of the place. They have a church built of brick, quite
commodious and decent; that having obtained last year large and abundant
crops of corn and indigo, they loaded two vessels with indigo, but that
they are dissatisfied on account of the number of deaths occurring among
them and also the lack of spiritual comforts from this same Priest, who
had asked for the Holy Oil of the Bishop of Cuba. That most of the
Minorcan Colonists are very devout; He saw them daily praying the Rosary
and receiving communion, but all wish to throw off the yoke of Great
Britain and pass again to the dominion of your Majesty--demonstrating
with strong and lively expressions their love and conservatism for the
Crown of Spain. This I believe, from all He tells me, He saw during His
stay among them. The Bishop concludes by stating: It is all he can tell
us regarding this affair, but he has taken steps for further information
which he will forward to your Majesty when obtained. All of which I make
known to the Council that it may proceed as most convenient.

Number 87--3--27--      Year 1773.


REPLY OF THE JUDGE.

The Judge being cognizant of your Majesty’s Royal Decree regarding the
consultation held by the Government on December 10th, 1772, at which
time said Tribunal recalling the proceedings and last state of the
expedient of the Minorcan families who passed over to Florida, with the
free use of their Catholic religion, he brings to the consideration of
your Majesty, among other things, that they implore of the Apostolic See
the grace and power for the actual missionaries of the Commission or
Bull from the Vatican, that they may administer the Sacrament of
confirmation to these faithful ones, while the Bishop of Cuba does not
dare concede these powers to them, on account of the natives and his
peculiar Episcopal dignity. That your Royal person deign to confer with
the Council in the following terms. As the Judge has decided, it seems
proper that my Minister in Rome should supplicate the Vatican for a
Bull, granting power to these missionaries, and have it sent by the
reserved way for their direction. In obedience to this sovereign
resolution, and to accomplish it in the spirit intended, the Judge has
had present the origin of this affair and the motive which actuated the
sentiment of the Council to the referred consultation of December 10th,
and with reference to one and the other He has found the minutes which
are rubricated by His hand, and accompany this reply. The proclaimed
minutes comprehend a general idea of the manner and style in which the
Minister of this Court in Rome should present the supplication and urge
the granting thereof in the order and regularity with which these
affairs are conducted in the Offices and Tribunals of Rome. The Judge
has not seen proper to state the form of these Bulls, leaving that to
the arbitration of your Majesty’s Minister, that time may not be lost
when the opportunity presents itself. The Judge feels that if the
Council finds nothing to correct in the minutes they should be sent by
the “via reservada” as arranged by the Royal Decree already mentioned,
that your Majesty may give it the direction which corresponds and is of
your Royal pleasure.

Madrid, Aug. 21st, 1773.


TESTIMONY SENT BY THE BISHOP OF CUBA.

_Sire_:

With regard to the Royal Cedula of the present January 3rd in which your
Royal Highness advises me to assist, care for, and aid the Catholic
Minorcan families established in the English Territory of Florida, in
accord with the Governor of the Post, I have given the interlocutory
decree comprehended in the testimony which I remit to your Majesty for
your sovereign approval.

May God preserve your Majesty for many years.

SANTIAGO JOSE, Bishop of Cuba.

Havana, June 30th, 1773.




CHAPTER XXI.

A. D. 1773-1786.

     _Letter from the King to the Bishop of Cuba concerning the petition
     soliciting an extension of time and the privileges conceded to Dr.
     Pedro Campos and Padre Bartolome Casanovas, Parochial Priest and
     Vicar of Catholic families of Minorca in Florida--Enclosing an open
     mandate of his Holiness enlarging and extending the time for twenty
     years, Madrid, 1773--A copy of a letter and statement sent in by
     Lieutenant of Hibernians, Don Nicholas Grenier, in regard to the
     importance of the St. Johns and St. Marys river Provinces, stating
     the need to his Majesty of vessels armed to impress and control
     these Provinces which are rich in timber, turpentine, pitch and
     tar--Considers it detrimental to Spanish interests for Americans to
     introduce any commerce in those Provinces--Letter for the
     Captain-General of Florida to the Governor of the post of St.
     Augustine concerning the great necessity of further protecting the
     Spanish interests along the St. Marys and St. Johns
     rivers--Tranquility of the country jeopardized by outlaws--Some
     have been arrested and paid the penalty with their lives--Matter
     referred to the Governor, 1774._


THE KING TO THE REV. FATHER IN CHRIST, BISHOP OF THE HOLY CHURCH,
CATHEDRAL OF SANTIAGO DE CUBA.

In a letter of August 29th, 1771, I am informed by Don Lamas Acpuro,
Archbishop, who was of Valencia and my Minister to the Court of Rome,
that in virtue of a warning from the Marquez of Grimalde in a letter of
July 23rd, he had formed the corresponding petition soliciting an
extension of time of the privileges conceded to Dr. Pedro Campos and
Padre Bartolome Casanovas, Parochial Priest and Vicar of the Catholic
families of Minorca, who went to establish themselves in the English
territory of Florida, asking also that his Holiness accord to these
Ecclesiastics and their successors the other graces and privileges
needed to administer to the spiritual nourishment of their flocks--and
having deemed it desirable to transmit them through Monseñor Zelada of
whom they had also availed themselves to investigate the truth of these
privileges, being one of the Prelates who served in the Tribunal of the
Holy Office. He immediately complied with the petition in consequence of
having sent it to his Holiness at the instigation of Monseñor Antonelli,
assistant of the same Tribunal, who spoke to his Holiness in audience,
using his favorable influence with the result shown in his letter to
Monseñor Zelada of August 24th, informing him that his Holiness extended
these privileges to twenty years--asking if he had complied with the
balance of the communication for greater privileges and followed the
instructions mentioned in the open mandate. He replied asking if he
would pass on to solicit in the practical way which was proper, and
hoping it would deserve my approbation. Having seen the referred to
document with my Council of the Indias, represented by Marquis de la
Torre, Governor and Captain-General of that Island, by letter dated
December 4th, 1771, concerning what you had done in consequence of the
warning given you in the affair of the aforementioned families,
explained by my Judge, and consulted me regarding it about the last of
December past. I have resolved (among other things) to send the
aforementioned open Mandate which has been obtained from his Holiness to
certify to you the enlargement and extension of time granted the
aforesaid Dr. Campos and Padre Casanovas and charging you (as I do) to
use all means that are proper for your Pastoral Ministry and those of
his Holiness, it has latterly been conceded you--having present by
Chapter 28 of the Mandate, you can communicate it to all the Priests
whom it may effect, and as the notice given you by the referred to Royal
Cedula of August 16th, 1771, you will attend to and aid spiritually all
the Catholics of Florida, this being my will.

THE KING.

Madrid, August 4th, 1773.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Excellent Sire_:

I enclose you a copy of a letter and statement which by my order was
sent in by Lieutenant of Hibernians Don Nicholas Grenier, upon his
return from the River St. Mary’s where since my arrival I have placed
him rather as a Commissioned than a detached Officer, as I have before
notified your Majesty, because it has seemed to me that is the most
important place in this Province as no doubt it will be in the future,
on account of its fine and accessible Bar, the abundance of magnificent
timber, the thorough knowledge the English have of the river, the
scarcity of this nation for building material would be a stimulus to the
Bahamas as well as to Satavento and Barlovento, that in future they
should be supplied from them. In a previous report I stated to your
Majesty the necessity I felt for two vessels for said river and the St.
John’s, but today I consider it my duty to make known to your Majesty
the great need we have of vessels, and would ask that you send a
Man-of-war with some schooners, launches and boats around as reserve
guards, not only for the St. Mary’s, but the St. John’s also, where the
Bar, although not as many feet deep as the St. Mary’s, is better and its
waters are navigable for larger vessels thirty leagues up the river, and
its banks abound in magnificent timber, especially the pine, from which
the English have taken many millions of barrels of turpentine, pitch and
tar. I also consider it important to have the armed vessels to secure
the tranquility of this Country and put a restraint upon the many
disturbers of peace who not knowing where to go and wishing to remain in
the Province refused to be subjected to Government or laws of any kind.
It is certain that in such cases a few armed vessels would make more
impression than two regiments since the swamps and woods make it almost
impossible for them to operate. The twenty-five Dragoons I now have are
not sufficient to maintain my orders with the proper authority,
therefore I fear to issue orders not to compromise the dignity of this
Government. My only resource and hope is that your Majesty will place me
in a position where, when occasion demands, I can act with the proper
spirit and decorum. God preserve you for many years.

St. Augustine, November 12th, 1784.


COPY OF LETTER OF COMMANDANT OF DETACHED BODY OF TROOPS ON THE ST.
MARY’S RIVER TO THE GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA.

_My Dear Sir_:

Acting upon the order imposed upon me by His Majesty, when I presented
myself for resignation of the commission under my charge on the river
St. Mary’s. I enclose adjusted a report stating as far as my ability
allows all that I have observed and consider worthy of your notice. God
preserve you many years.

NICOLAS GRENIER.


STATEMENT.

The Bar of St. Mary’s, so called, although its true name is Bar of
Amelia, is considered one of the best and least dangerous of the America
Septentrional. Vessels of 500 tons can enter. On either side are
Islands. The one on the right is called Cumberland, belonging to the
Americans; it is sparsely inhabited, exceedingly fertile in timber, as
American vessels come to cut it. The one on the left is called Amelia,
its land is considered very fertile, producing pine, cedar and oak in
abundance. Its inhabitants number some twenty families; these people
belong as much to one Island as the other, being variable and erratic in
their habits. The distance between Amelia and Cumberland, which forms
the channel where all vessels going up the St. Mary’s are obliged to
pass, is more or less--miles. For this reason a Fort or Castle at the
northern extremity of Amelia would be of the greatest advantage. The
channel formed by these Islands is at the mouth of the river. In front
of these Islands is a third one called Tiger, entirely depopulated, as
it is sterile, full of swamps and lakes so that no advantage can be
derived from it. From the anchoring grounds of Amelia to the entrance of
St. Mary’s river is a distance of one and a half miles and the River is
navigable for forty miles. At the mouth of said River there is a place
called by the English New Town or Princetown which was selected for
building a City, but the work was never carried out. The number of
outlaws between the towns of St. John’s and St. Mary’s is about sixty
families. Among them some might be useful to our Nation, but the others
the sooner we drive them out of the Province the better, as they are men
who have neither God nor law, and men who are capable of the greatest
atrocities. There is another River further in where vessels can navigate
for several miles, but it requires an experienced pilot, on account of
the numerous sand banks and small streams and the most experienced are
frequently deceived. There are four or five other small Islands. The
Talbot, St. George, Doctor and the Pierce, all these Islands, although
in themselves small, are of much value for their beautiful pines, cedars
and oaks. I consider it detrimental to our interests that the Americans
introduce any commerce in this Province, and at the same time I believe
the best way to prevent it would be to establish a fleet. These Islands
produce timber to build the vessels.

NICOLAS GRENIER.

St. Augustine, Fla., Nov. 10th, 1784.


1786.

LETTER FOR THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL OF FLORIDA TO THE GOVERNOR OF THE POST OF
ST. AUGUSTINE.

Don Vicente Manuel de Cespedes gave an account in three letters directed
to your Excellency that Don Nicolas Grenier, who commanded the detached
company on the River St. Mary’s, stated the urgency and necessity of
protecting that post for the advantages which would accrue from it to
the Royal service, and tranquility of the Country. The inhabitants have
openly declared against us, but conceal themselves in wilderness on the
banks of the St. John’s as far as St. Mary’s controlling that Province.
He warned the English Governor Don Patrick Louin to prosecute the
perfidity of such men, if he would secure a peaceful Government. The
opinion he had formed of them was afterwards confirmed by the frequent
thefts and deprivation, it could not be remedied for the want of aid.
Under such circumstances I judge it better to wait and allow them to
leave and then vigorously oppose their re-entering the Province. At
present, the beginning of the year 1785, we find ourselves free from
many of the principal leaders of them, who went over to Pensacola and
other English settlements and to the United States, where some have paid
the penalty of their misdeeds with their lives. The Señor Louin seemed
to think the time had arrived when they should be prosecuted, and so he
sent to arrest one of the outlaws, Daniel Mc----, in the name of Great
Britain. Candido Salteador and Guillermo Cunningham are even worse than
the others, being constant receivers of stolen goods. He afterwards gave
them their liberty under bond that they should leave the Province with
the tide, using the launch San Pedro to convey them, he made them take
oath never to re-enter the Province nor surrounding country. We are to
consult with Providence as to what steps must be taken with Cunningham’s
wife and children. The reports having been examined by the Council of
Indians, they have decided to take no steps at present, the King
agreeing to the proposition, and his Majesty commands me to return your
Excellency the above referred reports and testimonials, that as
Captain-General of the Province of St. Augustine, is to proceed in the
case, as your Excellency, under the circumstances, should determine in
things of weight as well as in minor affairs, as behooves a Governor of
Florida. Render a just account of the results, and of the Royal Order. I
warn your Excellency that you fulfill it.

God preserve you for many years.

SEÑOR.

Madrid, December 5th, 1786.

       *       *       *       *       *


 Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

 Jaun=> Juan {multiple times}

 Jaun Cebadillo=> Juan Cebadilla

 Juan Cebadillo=> Juan Cebadilla

 take Jaques de Soria=> take Jacques de Soria {pg 7}

 Fernando Mirando=> Fernando Miranda {pg 27}

 Notary Public Juan Ximanes=> Notary Public Juan Ximenes {pg viii}

 Fray Blas DeMontes=> Fray Blas De Montes {pg viii}

 day of the Anethema=> day of the Anathema {pg 93}

 Don Diego de Rolallado=> Don Diego de Rebolledo {pg 98}

 Diego Robelledo=> Diego Rebolledo {pg x, 96, 105}

 retard the convertion=> retard the conversion {pg x}

 Alonzo Aranqui y Cartez=> Alonzo Aranqui y Cortez {pg x}

 Report of Fernando Mirando, agent to the King=> Report of Fernando
 Miranda, agent to the King {pg vii}

 Notary Public Juan Ximanes=> Notary Public Juan Ximenes {pg viii}

 Juan Ximanes, a Notary Public and secretary=> Juan Ximenes, a Notary
 Public and secretary {pg 34}

 Nothwithstanding all the above=> Notwithstanding all the above {pg 36}

 he saw what sucess=> he saw what success {pg 38}

 go to the Monastary=> go to the Monastery {pg 38}

 they proceed to feret=> they proceed to ferret {pg 78}

 three hudred=> three hundred {pg 89}

 Senor => Señor {x10}

 Monsenor=> Monseñor {x4 }

 such exhorbitant=> such exorbitant {pg 100}

 large quanitity=> large quantity {pg 100}

 Francisco De La Guerre y Vega concerning=> Francisco De La Guerra y
 Vega concerning {pg xi}

 Francisco Guerray Vega reports=> Francisco Guerra y Vega reports {pg
 107}

 Jaun Marquez Cabera, Governor and Captain-General of Florida=> Juan
 Marquez Cabrera, Governor and Captain-General of Florida {pg xii}

 The King reprimands Don Diego Quiraga=> The King reprimands Don Diego
 Quiroga {pg xii}

 Don-Diego Quiroba y Losada=> Don Diego Quiroga y Losada {pg xii}

 Augustine by Governor Don Diego Guiroga y Losada=> Augustine by
 Governor Don Diego Quiroga y Losada {pg xii, xiii}

 His illtreatment of a Captain=> His ill treatment of a Captain {pg
 xiii}

 Francisco Carcoles y Martinez=> Francisco Córcoles y Martinez {pg xiii}

 Francisco Carcales y Martinez=> Francisco Córcoles y Martinez {pg xiv}

 Appalachicola=> Apalachicola {pg xiii. 97, 164}

 Corcoles=> Córcoles {x4}

 so they many not vex the natives=> so they may not vex the natives {pg
 5}

 them a canonade and=> them a cannonade and {pg 5}

 the keys of Canavarel=> the keys of Canaveral {pg 23}

 Diego Fernandez de Guinones, in Havana=> Diego Fernandez de Quinones,
 in Havana {pg 31}

 Having been imformed=> Having been informed {pg 102}

 which to accummulate=> which to accumulate {pg 126}

 ocupying a passage=> occupying a passage {pg 130}

 send me reenforcements=> send me re-enforcements {pg 145}

 Diego Guiroba y Losada=> Diego Quiroba y Losada {pg 151}

 He proposed the the=> He proposed the {pg 153}

 Antonio Bienavidos=> Antonio Bienavides {pg 160, 170, 171, 173}

 Antonio Bienavides=> Antonio Benavides {pg 164, 173}

 Governor of St. Augutine=> Governor of St. Augustine {pg 177}

 they were drillng=> they were drilling {pg 179}

 they are cuttng=> they are cutting {pg 185}

 available to investige=> available to investigate {pg 196}

 Fray Casanova=> Fray Casanovas {pg 194, }

 Father Bartolome Casanova=> Father Bartolome Casanovas {pg 204, 205,
 212}

 Fray Casanova=> Fray Casanovas {pg 193, 194, }

 Don Bartolome Casanova=> Don Bartolome Casanovas {pg 196, 197}

 Father Casanova=> Father Casanovas {pg 206, 207, 208}

 From all this results=> From all this result {pg 208}

 St. Marys River to the Governor=> St. Mary's River to the Governor {pg
 230}

 the America Septentional=> the America Septentrional {pg 230}







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The unwritten history of old St.
Augustine, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNWRITTEN HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 54804-0.txt or 54804-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/8/0/54804/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
